 

FOREWORD

What  a  timely  book!  Larry  Bell’s  insightful  overview  of  global
warming  hysteria  will  open  the  eyes  of  many  who  still  believe  in  the
science as propagated by the United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate  Change  (IPCC)  and  in  the  promises  of  politicians  to  save  them
from climate disasters. After two decades of corrupt science, we are finally
able  to  learn  the  truth  about  the  politics  behind  the  conspiracy  among  a
small group of influential scientists to manufacture a global warming scare
from data that showed none.

Many  would  place  the  beginning  of  the  global  warming  hoax  on  the
Senate testimony delivered by James Hansen of NASA during the summer
of 1988. More than anything else, this exhibition of hyped alarm triggered
my active skepticism about the man-made warming scare. This skepticism
was  further  amplified  when  I  acted  as  a  reviewer  of  the  first  three  IPCC
reports, in 1990, 1996, and 2001. Increasingly, claims were made for which
there  was  no  evidence;  in  some  cases  the  “evidence”  was  clearly
manufactured.  For  example,  the  1996  report  used  selective  data  and
doctored graphs. It also featured changes in the text that were made after
the  scientists  had  approved  it  and  before  it  was  printed.  It  caused  Dr.
Frederick  Seitz,  a  worldfamous  physicist  and  former  president  of  the  US
National  Academy  of  Sciences,  the  American  Physical  Society,  and  the
Rockefeller University, to write in the Wall Street Journal:  “I  have  never
witnessed  a  more  disturbing  corruption  of  the  peer  review  process  than
events that led to this IPCC report.”

All throughout, politicians loudly proclaimed that “the science is settled”
and  proceeded  to  construct  regulatory  schemes  to  limit  the  emission  of
greenhouse  gases  (GHGs)  and—in  the  process—to  control  energy.  The
capstone to all this fraudulent behavior must surely be the “cap-and-trade”
legislation  passed  by  the  US  House  of  Representatives  in  2009.  It  has
nothing to do with climate; instead, it is a giant tax scheme that redistributes

income  from  citizens  who  use  energy,  whether  electricity  heat  or  motor
fuel,  to  the  favored  few.  It  has  been  estimated  that  this  legislation  has
provided  a  livelihood  to  some  two  thousand  or  more  lobbyists  and  has
placed a corresponding burden on the rest of the population.

By now, the international climate business has degenerated into a scheme
to transfer resources from developed to developing nations. Or as cynics put
it, “from the poor in rich countries to the rich in poor countries.”

The truth is that there is no evidence for any significant human impact on
global climate, and that there is nothing in a practical sense we can do to
affect  global  climate.  And,  as  Larry  Bell  points  out,  a  somewhat  warmer
climate with increased levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere would be
beneficial overall to Earth’s inhabitants, especially to those in developing
nations  who  depend  on  agriculture  for  a  living.  Climate  of  Corruption
brings a breath of fresh, cool air to the overheated climate debate.

—S. Fred Singer
Former director of the US National Weather Satellite Service, professor
emeritus at the University of Virginia, and coauthor of Unstoppable Global
Warming

 

PREFACE

Regarding climate science there is at least one certainty: There is
absolutely no reason to believe that Earth is any warmer now than it was
during  past  periods  when  life  flourished—times  when  agriculture  was
abundant,  pyramids  and  cities  were  built,  and  world  citizens  became
connected in trade and culture.

The  March  2006  Time  magazine  cover  story  “Global  Warming:  Be
Worried, Be Very Worried” warned of impending climate doom that would
result  in  melting  polar  caps,  rising  oceans,  and  other  catastrophes.  If  any
worry  is  warranted,  think  about  the  next  overdue  Ice  Age  that  scientific
“experts” predicted only a few decades earlier. Then hope that the cooling
period we are currently experiencing will only be brief. Understand that the
real  impetus  behind  the  cooked  numbers  and  doomspeak  of  the  global
warmers has little to do with the state of the environment and much to do
with shackling capitalism and transforming the American way of life in the
interests of global wealth redistribution (“social justice”).

Is this all a conspiracy? It really isn’t in the conventional sense, where a
diabolical network of people and organizations unite to hatch intentionally
malevolent  plans.  Let’s  assume  that  most  of  the  entities  and  individuals
discussed in this book truly believe they are pursuing righteous causes, even
when we happen to strongly disagree with their viewpoints and priorities.
Maybe we can hope that some of them will cut us the same slack.

But then, what about when those people and institutions we rely upon for
important public information knowingly violate our trust? For example, by
perpetrating  unwarranted  fear  campaigns  and  by  politically  attacking  and
marginalizing  those  who  challenge  and  expose  factual  errors,  omissions,
and  uncertainties  we  need  to  know  about.  Should  we  excuse  them  even
when  they  believe  such  actions  are  guided  by  superior  moral  authority?
Absolutely not! These are clear acts of deception and corruption.

Obviously, this book addresses controversial topics, and readers have a
right to know something about the person who wrote it. First, I am not a
climate  scientist  and  have  never  even  played  one  in  the  movies.  And
although Houston is my chosen home, I have never been associated with
“Big Oil”—or “little oil” either, for that matter. Nor am I connected with
scientific funding, business organizations, or lobbies on either side of the
issues. Few people within any such camps will know who I am, nor do they
have any real reason to.

I have written some articles about climate, energy, and technology that
were published in the Energy Tribune, an international magazine. This was
done by invitation, and for small stipends, yet never was I influenced in any
way  regarding  what  I  would  write  about  or  say.  I  would  have  cheerfully
written them free of charge, but please don’t tell the magazine.

2

In short, I am a space guy. My field is space architecture, which deals
with planning and designing space stations and habitats for future lunar and
Mars  missions.  I  also  undertake  research  and  planning  for  extreme
environments  on  Earth,  such  as  polar,  desert,  underwater,  and  disaster
facilities. This interest extends to working to prevent our entire planet from
becoming an extreme environment.

My background and interests emphasize a holistic perspective regarding
basic principles that govern how natural and technical systems work, how
they  are  connected,  and  how  they  can  be  managed  to  support  the  most
complex systems of all—us humans. This, in fact, is how this project really
got  started.  I  was  innocently  exploring  some  research  and  notions  about
“Spaceship Earth”—considering what we might possibly learn from nature
about how to design artificial, closed climate and energy systems operating
beyond our planet. Some space guys think about those kinds of things. In
any case, that inquiry revealed much more than I bargained for.

Quite early in my investigation, I recalled a comment offered by S. Fred
Singer when he visited my office several years ago to exchange ideas on a
totally different space-related matter. During our meeting, he observed that
satellite  temperature  recordings  of  the  Earth’s  lower  atmosphere  were
cooling  more  rapidly,  relative  to  the  surface,  than  greenhouse  theory
predicts. It would be expected that carbon dioxide (CO
) would warm the
lower atmosphere first, which would then radiate heat back to the surface,
the reverse of what was being observed. I certainly had no reason to doubt
him.  Fred  is  an  internationally  recognized  climate  physicist  and  former

Distinguished Research Professor at George Mason University. He served
as the first director of the US National Weather Satellite Service and also as
vice  chairman  of  the  US  National  Advisory  Committee  on  Oceans  and
Atmospheres.  In  addition,  he  has  written  numerous  publications  about
climate,  energy,  and  environmental  issues,  including  a  recent  New  York
Times best seller, Unstoppable Global Warming, coauthored with Dennis T.
Avery.

Although I didn’t think all that much about Fred’s casual observation at
the  time,  it  piqued  a  mild  interest,  and  my  later  investigations  have
amplified  questions  regarding  numerous  climate  change  hypotheses,  most
particularly  in  regard  to  alarmist  assertions,  which  have  no  real  basis  in
science.  My  subsequent  conclusions  will  now  qualify  me  as  a  global
warming skeptic and doomsday denier. This is not intended to suggest that I
don’t believe that climate change occurs or that it isn’t abnormally warm
right now. Compared with Ice Ages that have historically dominated Earth’s
climate about 90 percent of the time, we can be very grateful we are blessed
with conditions more favorable for the lives we enjoy.

Yes, climate change is real, occurring with regular and irregular cycles
and for lots of reasons. Scientists know about many of them, but much less
about  how  these  dynamic  causes  and  effects  interact  or  what  combined
results will occur at any given time. No one, not anyone, can even begin to
reliably  predict  what  Earth’s  global  climate  will  be  a  decade  or  multiple
decades hence, much less whether the impacts will be positive or negative
with  regard  to  all  God’s  creatures—us  included.  Nor  has  anyone  or  any
science conclusively demonstrated that human activities have caused or are
causing climate change for better or worse, or if so, which activities, and
with  how  much  influence.  Any  claims  of  certainty  to  the  contrary  are
bogus. Accordingly, and specifically, assertions that human CO
 emissions
are the root of climate crisis, or that such a threat exists, are challenged as
factually unsupportable alarmism.

One  unfortunate  fact  we  can  count  on  is  that  we  are  facing  a  global
energy supply dilemma that has no simple solution. Answers do not lie with
much-touted  “renewable”  energy  sources,  because  they  all  lack  sufficient
potential  capacities  to  make  much  overall  difference.  And  for  all  their
advertised  “greenness,”  absolutely  no  options  are 
from
environmental activist opposition. Yet fossil fuels (coal, oil, and natural gas
—particularly  coal)  are  regarded  as  real  villains,  and  a  predicted  global

2

immune 

2

2

warming apocalypse will be their curse. (The term “fossil fuels” often will
be referred to hereafter simply as “fossils.”) Even resistance to the scourge
of  disaster  risks  previously  associated  with  nuclear  power  now  pales  in
comparison.

Global  warming  hysteria  centered  upon  fossil-fuel  CO

  emissions  is
being advanced and exploited by powerful alternative energy marketers and
carbon-trading  interests.  Aided  and  abetted  by  climate  science  hijackers,
their  aggressive  lobbying  campaigns  have  been  extremely  consequential.
CO
, which sustains plants that nourish us with oxygen and food, has come
to be popularly characterized as a polluting menace. Initiatives to develop
vital oil and natural gas reserves are being delayed, while options with scant
potential dominate public media and legislative attention.

Inescapable evidence shows that human activities are impacting Earth’s
environment, typically not for the better. Air, water, and land pollution are
an  expanding  global  reality.  Environmental  scientists  who  study  such
matters play important roles in pointing such things out and helping us to do
better. That purpose is not well served, however, by exaggerated statements
calibrated to get maximum attention. Alarmism is not conducive to sound
judgment or worthy of public respect, whatever the motives.

There can also be no doubt that fossil fuel depletion is a very real and
serious  problem,  and  while  nuclear  development  is  essential,  it  is  most
unfortunate that there are presently no complete or perfect remedies. Yet,
given our proven history of human innovation, progress, and resilience, we
have every reason to believe that solutions will ultimately be realized.

I had never planned to write this book—or any book. First, after family
and  friends  witnessed  the  amount  of  research  I  had  compiled—and  were
relentlessly exposed to my ever-deepening passion about the topics—they
insisted that I do so. Eventually, I realized that I had to, like it or not. This
decision was motivated by the fact that, like many of you, I am a parent
who  cares  about  the  future  of  my  children  and  the  generations  who  will
follow. I want them to inherit a clean, healthy planet, along with means to
obtain energy sufficiency essential for comfortable lifestyles and economic
opportunities. Conservation must be a big part of all solutions.

We clearly need to develop better alternatives, and to begin doing so now.
In the meantime, we must also develop and expand access to resources that
will enable those transitions; we must not be misled by hyperbole regarding
sustainable replacement options that can only serve as supplements at best.

Misguided, climate hysteria–induced, knee-jerk energy policies won’t help
get us where we need to go.

Each of us must determine whether or not we regard ourselves to be true
environmentalists. I believe that environmentalism is not so much defined
by what we are against as by what we are for, and neither fear nor guilt are
prerequisites.  Environmentalism  need  not  be  strident  or  perpetually
confrontational. An environmentalist identity cannot really be owned, only
practiced.

SOME DESERVED WORDS OF APPRECATION

 

supported 

its 

The  preparation  and  production  of  this  book  turned  out  to  be  a
much larger enterprise than I originally expected, and I am grateful to many
people  who 
realization.  My  wife  Nancy’s  early
encouragement to undertake the project and continued belief in its value has
been essential throughout the process. Major typing assistance afforded by
my sons, Aaron and Ian, has transcribed my hand-printed draft jottings into
legible text.

My esteemed colleague Professor Olga Bannova has been an ever-willing
sounding board for ideas and a constructive critic for narrative. Two of our
graduate  students,  Harmon  Everett  and  Michael  Fehlinger,  contributed  to
manuscript  production  as  author-compensated  consultants.  It  should  be
noted that neither the book nor any perspectives it presents are in any way
implied to represent publications or views of my employers: the University
of Houston, the Gerald D. Hines College of Architecture, or the research
center that I direct within the university. Nor is the book used as a text or
designated information resource for any courses that I teach or supervise.

The wonderfully competent, dedicated, and enthusiastic Greenleaf Book
Group team has contributed in all ways imaginable to make this project a
successful  and  pleasurable  experience.  Editors  Bill  Crawford  and  Linda
O’Doughda offered innumerable structural and literary suggestions to make
it a greatly improved product. Graphic designer Brian Phillips produced the
attractive  and  engaging  jacket  artwork,  also  collaborating  with  Design
Manager Sheila Parr on internal book layout. Others, including Production
Manager  Chris  McRay,  Marketing  Associate  Katelynn  Knutson,  and
Distribution  Manager  Kristen  Sears,  planned  and  coordinated  numerous
aspects of production and market promotion.

Thank you all.

 
ACEEE American Council for an Energy-Effcient Economy
Alliance for Climate Protection
ACP
AMO
Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation
ANWR Arctic National Wildlife Refuge
AWEA American Wind Energy Association
bbl/d
CAFE
CAP
CBO
CCS
CCSP
CCX
CDA
CFCs
CFL

barrels per day
corporate average fuel economy
Center for American Progress
Congressional Budget Offce
carbon capture and storage
Climate Change Science Program
Chicago Climate Exchange
Center for Data Analysis
chlorofuorocarbons
compact fuorescent lighting
carbon dioxide
CRU
Climate Research Unit
CSP
concentrating solar power
CSR
corporate social responsibility
DOE
Department of Energy (US)
DOI
Department of the Interior (US)
DSCOVR Deep Space Climate Observatory
ECX
EGS
EIA
EPA
ESA

ABBREVATIONS AND ACRONYMS

European Carbon Exchange
enhanced geothermal system
Energy Information Administration
Environmental Protection Agency (US)
Endangered Species Act

European Union
EU
extreme ultraviolet
EUV
Framework Convention on Climate Change
FCCC
Fish and Wildlife Service (US)
FWS
galactic cosmic ray
GCR
general circulation model
GCM
gross domestic product
GDP
greenhouse gas
GHG
Generation Investment Management
GIM
GISS
Goddard Institute for Space Studies
GSAM Goldman Sachs Asset Management
GW
ICAP
ICE
IEA
IGCC
IMF
IPE
IPCC
IPPR
kW
kWh
LIA
MW
MWP
N
NASA
NCEE
NGO
NIEO
NOAA National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration
NRDC

gigawatt
International Carbon Action Partnership
Intercontinental Exchange, Inc.
Institute of Economic Analysis
integrated gasifcation combined cycle
International Monetary Fund
International Petroleum Exchange
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Institute for Public Policy Research
kilowatt
kilowatt-hour
Little Ice Age
megawatt
Medieval Warm Period
nitrous oxide
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
National Center for Environmental Economics
nongovernmental organization
New International Economic Order

Natural Resources Defense Council

O

2

Offce of Management and Budget
Open Society Institute
Pacifc Decadal Oscillation
parts per million
production tax credit
Royal Canadian Mounted Police
renewable portfolio standard
sulfur dioxide
Statistical Assessment Services
Union of Concerned Scientists

OMB
OSI
PDO
ppm
PTC
RCMP
RPS
SO,
STATS
UCS
UNCED United Nations Conference on Economic Development
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme
USCAP United States Climate Action Partnership
USGS
UV
VAT
WCED World Commission on Environment and Development
WMO World Meteorological Organization
WTO
WWF World Wildlife Fund

United States Geological Survey
ultraviolet
value added tax

World Trade Organization

Introduction

THE BIG CLIMATE CRISIS LIE

 

Spaceship  Earth  reporting  …  all  systems  functioning…  thermal

controls optimum. Thank you, God.

Conscientious environmentalism does not require or benefit from
subscription  to  hysterical  guilt  over  man-made  climate  crisis  claims.
Perhaps  some  may  argue  that  unfounded  alarmism  is  justifiable,  even
necessary, to get our attention to do what we should be doing anyway: for
example,  conserve  energy  and  not  pollute  the  planet.  Hey,  who  wants  to
challenge those important purposes?

But what about examining motives? For example, when those who are
twanging our guilt strings falsely portray polar bears as endangered climate
victims  to  block  drilling  in  Alaska’s  Arctic  Natural  Wildlife  Reserve
 as an endangering pollutant to
(ANWR), and when alarmists classify CO

2

promote  lucrative  cap-and-trade  legislation  and  otherwise  unwarranted
alternative energy subsidies. What if these representations lack any sound
scientific basis? Is that okay?

The Hot Spin Cycle

 

Cyclical,  abrupt,  and  dramatic  global  and  regional 

temperature
fluctuations  have  occurred  over  millions  of  years,  long  before  humans
invented agriculture, industries, automobiles, and carbon-trading schemes.
Many  natural  factors  are  known  to  contribute  to  these  changes,  although
even  our  most  sophisticated  climate  models  have  failed  to  predict  the
timing,  scale  (either  up  or  down),  impacts,  or  human  influences.  While
theories abound, there is no consensus, as claimed, that “science is settled”
on  any  of  those  theories—much  less  is  there  consensus  about  the  human
influences upon or threat implications of climate change.

Among these hypotheses, man-made global warming caused by burning
fossils has been trumpeted as an epic crisis. CO
, a “greenhouse gas,” has
been  identified  as  a  primary  culprit  and  branded  as  an  endangering
“pollutant.”  This,  despite  the  fact  that  throughout  Earth’s  history  the
increases  in  the  atmospheric  CO
  level  have  tended  to  follow,  not  lead,
rising temperatures. It should also be understood that CO
 accounts for only
0.04 of 1 percent of the atmosphere, and about 97 percent of that tiny trace
amount  comes  from  naturally  occurring  sources  that  humans  haven’t
influenced.

The big lie is that we are living in a known climate change crisis. Climate
warming  and  cooling  have  occurred  throughout  the  ages.  Is  the  Earth
warming right now? Probably not, but what if it is? It might be cooling next
year. The models that predict a crisis are speculative at best, and two recent
events  have  cast  even  more  doubt  on  their  accuracy.  One  relates  to
undisputable  evidence  that  influential  members  of  the  climate  science
community  have  cooked  the  books  to  advance  their  theories  and
marginalize  contrary  findings.  The  other  problem  is  evidence  provided
directly by Mother Nature herself that the global climate appears to have
entered a new cooling cycle.

Public  exposure  of  hacked  e-mail  files  retrieved  from  the  Climate
Research  Unit  (CRU)  at  Britain’s  University  of  East  Anglia  revealed

2

2

2

scandalous communications among researchers who have fomented global
warming  hysteria.  Their  exchanges  confirm  long-standing  and  broadly
suspected manipulations of climate data. Included are conspiracies to falsify
and  withhold  information,  to  suppress  contrary  findings  in  scholarly
publications,  and  to  exaggerate  the  existence  and  threats  of  man-made
global warming. Many of these individuals have had major influence over
summary  report  findings  issued  by  the  United  Nations’  IPCC.  This
organization  has  been  recognized  as  the  world  authority  on  such  matters,
and  it  shares  a  Nobel  Prize  with  Al  Gore  for  advancing  climate  change
awareness.

Among the more than three thousand purloined CRU documents is an e-
mail from its director, Philip Jones, regarding a way to fudge the data to
hide evidence of temperature declines: “I’ve just completed Mike’s Nature
[journal] trick of adding the real temperatures to each series for the past 20
years [i.e., from 1981 onward] and from 1961 for Keith’s to hide the decline
[emphasis mine].” “Mike,” in this instance, refers to climatologist Michael
Mann,  who  created  the  now  infamous  “hockey  stick”  chart  that  has
repeatedly appeared in IPCC reports, as well as in Al Gore promotions, to
portray  accelerated  global  warming  beginning  with 
the  Industrial
Revolution—hence,  caused  by  humans.  The  chart  has  been  thoroughly
debunked  thanks  to  careful  analyses  by  two  Canadian  researchers  who
uncovered  a  variety  of  serious  problems.  Included  are  calculation  errors,
data used twice, and a computer program that produced a hockey stick out
of whatever data was fed into it.1

Some  of  the  e-mails  reveal  less  than  full  public  candor  about  what
scientists  don’t  know  about  past  temperatures.  For  example,  one  from
Edward Cook, director of tree ring research at the Lamont-Doherty Earth
Laboratory, to CRU’s deputy director Keith Briffa on September 3, 2003,
admitted that little could be deduced regarding past Northern Hemisphere
temperatures from the tree ring proxy data Mann used: “We can probably
say  a  fair  bit  about  [less  than]  100-year  extra-tropical  NH  temperature
variability … but honestly know f**k-all [expletive deleted] about what the
[more than] 100-year variability was like with any certainty.”

Correspondence leaves no doubt that the members of the network were
concerned  the  cooling  since  1998  they  had  observed  would  be  publicly
exposed. In an October 26, 2008, note from CRU’s Mick Kelly to Jones, he
comments,  “Yeah,  it  wasn’t  so  much  1998  and  all  that  I  was  concerned

Another  e-mail  to  Michael  Mann  (which  James  Hansen  at  NASA  was
copied on), sent by Kevin Trenberth, head of the Climate Analysis Section
of the US National Center for Atmospheric Research, reflected exasperation
concerning  a  lack  of  global  warming  evidence:  “Well,  I  have  my  own
article on where the heck is global warming. We are asking here in Boulder
where  we  have  broken  records  the  past  two  days  for  the  coldest  days  on
record. We had four inches of snow.” He continued, “The fact is that we
can’t account for the lack of warming at the moment, and it is a travesty that
we can’t … the data is surely wrong. Our observing system is inadequate.”2
Trenberth, an advisory IPCC high priest and man-made global warming
spokesperson,  didn’t  waste  a  publicity  opportunity  to  link  a  devastating
2005 US hurricane season to this cause. After ignoring admonitions from
top expert Christopher Landsea that this assumption was not supported by
known  research,  Trenberth  proceeded  with  the  unfounded  claim  that
dominated world headlines.

Clearly,  members  of  the  CRU  e-mail  network  used  their  considerable
influence  to  block  the  publication  of  research  by  climate  crisis  skeptics,
thus  preventing  inclusion  of  contrary  findings  in  IPCC  reports.  In  one  e-
mail, Tom Wigley, a senior scientist and Trenberth associate at the National
Center  for  Atmospheric  Research,  shared  his  disdain  for  global  warming
challengers, common among global warming proponents: “If you think that
[Yale professor James] Saiers is in the greenhouse skeptics camp, then, if
we  can  find  documentary  evidence  of  this,  we  could  go  through  official
[American Geophysical Union] channels to get him ousted.”3

about, used to dealing with that, but the possibility that we might be going
through a longer 10-year period of relatively stable temperatures . . .” He
added,  “Speculation  but  if  I  see  this  possibility,  then  others  might  also.
Anyway, I’ll maybe cut the last few points off the filtered curve before I
give the talk again as that’s trending down as a result of the effects and the
recent cold-ish years.”

Possibly  one  of  the  most  serious  and  legally  hazardous  breaches  of
professional  accountability  is  seen  in  an  e-mail  from  Jones  to  Mann
concerning withholding of taxpayer-supported scientific data: “If they ever
hear  there  is  a  Freedom  of  Information  Act  now  in  the  UK,  I  think  I’ll
delete the file rather than send it to anyone.” He then asks Mann to join him
in deleting official IPCC-related files: “Can you delete any e-mails you may
have had with Keith re: AR4 [the IPCC’s Fourth Assessment Report]?” A

different  e-mail  from  Jones  assures  Mann  of  the  way  some  troublesome
contrarian research will be handled: “I can’t see either of these papers being
in the next IPCC report. Kevin and I will keep them out somehow, even if
we have to redefine what the peer-reviewed process is!”

A Jones letter to his colleagues instructed them, “Don’t any of you three
tell anyone that the UK has a Freedom of Information Act.” Still another
stated, “We also have a data platform act, which I will hide behind.”

The CRU fallout is spreading: It now includes broader allegations by a
Russian  scientific  group  that  climate-change  data  obtained  from  that
country has been cherry-picked to overstate a rise in temperatures. Russia
accounts  for  a  large  portion  of  the  world’s  landmass,  and  incorrect  data
there would affect overall global temperature analyses.

Two  things  are  clear  from  the  CRU  emails:  (1)  Perpetrators  of  climate
science fraud have routinely conspired to exaggerate temperature increases
since  the  Industrial  Revolution,  and  (2)  these  same  perpetrators  virtually
ignored  comparable  and  even  warmer  times  that  preceded  this  period,  as
well  as  prolonged  temperature  declines  since  this  period,  that  contradict
greenhouse theory and model predictions. Other explanations that conform
much  more  closely  to  observed  fluctuations  have  been  dismissed  or
aggressively  attacked.  These  practices  have  produced  unsupportable
alarmist statements trumpeted in the world press that continue to influence
multitrillion-dollar US and international policy decisions—decisions based
upon a contrived crisis of hysteria … a climate of corruption.

Chilling News for “Warm-Mongers”

 

The climate is always changing, in long and short cycles, and mankind
has survived and thrived in conditions that have varied greatly from what
they are right now.

It is apparent that our planet is once again experiencing a global cooling
trend, just as it did quite recently between 1940 and 1975, when warnings
of  a  coming  new  ice  age  received  front-page  coverage  in  the  New  York
Times  and  other  major  publications.  NASA  satellite  measurements  of  the
lower  atmosphere,  where  warming  greenhouse  models  predicted  effects
would  be  greatest,  stopped  rising  as  a  decadal  trend  after  1998  despite
.  Measurements  recorded  by  four  major
increased 

levels  of  CO

 

2

If  ordinary  citizens  don’t  receive  or  heed  scientific  reports,  many  may
legitimately  question  global  warming  assertions  from  direct  experience.
Take  the  year  2007,  for  example.  North  America  had  the  most  snow  it’s
recorded  in  the  past  50  years.  A  Boston  storm  in  December  dumped  10
inches of snow, more than the city typically receives in that entire month,
and  Madison,  Wisconsin,  had  the  highest  seasonal  snowfall  since  record
keeping  began.5  Record  cold  temperatures  were  recorded  in  Minnesota,
Texas, Florida, and Mexico.

Those trends continued into the following 2 years. During October 2008,
Oregon temperatures mid-month dipped to record lows, and Boise, Idaho,
received its earliest-ever recorded snowfall. December 2008 witnessed 3.6
inches of snow in the Las Vegas Valley, the most to have fallen at that time
of  year  since  1938,  when  record  keeping  began.  Houston  witnessed  its
earliest-ever recorded snowfall on December 4, 2009.6

temperature-tracking outlets showed that world temperatures plummeted by
more than 1 degree Fahrenheit (1ºF) during 2007. This cooling approached
the total of all the warming that had occurred over that past 100 years. In
other words, temperatures worldwide and collectively never rose more than
1ºF  in  a  century.  2008  was  significantly  colder  than  2007  had  been.
Although models predicted that the year 2008 would be one of the warmest
on  record,  it  actually  ranked  fourteenth  coldest  since  satellite  records
commenced in 1979, and the coldest since 2000.4

A blizzard on February 20, 2010, broke a Washington, DC, 110-year-old
annual  snowfall  record  of  55  inches  as  well  as  seasonal  records  in
Baltimore and Philadelphia.7 Then, on February 26 and 27, another storm
that pummeled New York City for 2 days broke a monthly snowfall record
(37 inches) in Central Park that had stood for 114 years; the previous record
for February was 28 inches in 1934, and the largest for any month was 30.5
inches in March 1896.8

Most people’s perceptions about warming and cooling trends depend on
where they happen to reside and the time range they have experienced for
reference.  During  July  2010,  those  throughout  New  England  witnessed
temperatures among the ten warmest recorded during that month in about a
century,  while  temperatures  in  southeastern  US  states  registered  below
normal. Simultaneously, Los Angeles broke a coldest July day record set in
1926, Australia since 1966, and the southern cone of South America saw
the coldest July in half a century.9 Freezing temperatures in eastern Bolivia

(normally  above  68ºF)  killed  millions  of  fish  in  three  major  rivers,
characterized there as an environmental catastrophe.10

Going back to 2007, Baghdad saw its first snowfall ever recorded, and
China experienced its coldest winter in 100 years. Record cold temperatures
were also recorded in Argentina, Chile, and yes, even Greenland. The end
of 2007 set a record for the largest Southern Hemisphere sea ice expanse
since satellite altimeter monitoring began in 1979, it was about 1 million
square kilometers more than the previous 28-year average. In 2008, Durban,
South Africa, had its coldest September night in history, and parts of that
country  experienced  an  unusual  late-winter  snow.  A  month  earlier,  New
Zealand officials at Mount Ruapehu reported the largest snow accumulation
ever.11

2

According  to  records  collected  by  NASA,  the  National  Oceanographic
and  Atmospheric  Administration  (NOAA),  and  the  Hadley  Centre  for
Climate Change, 2008 was cooler than 2007, making it the coldest year thus
far of the 21st century. And this has occurred while atmospheric CO
 levels
have continued to rise.12

This picture is far different from much of the information presented in the
media. As a case in point, a 2008 Associated Press report claimed that the
10  warmest  days  recorded  have  occurred  since  the  time  of  President  Bill
Clinton’s  second  inaugural  in  January  1997.  The  report  quoted  James
Hansen,  who  heads  NASA’s  Godard  Institute  for  Space  Studies  (GISS);
Hansen is a principal adviser to Al Gore and has been a primary source of
much global warming alarmism. NASA later issued corrections. In reality,
the warmest recorded days—in descending order— occurred in 1934, 1998,
1921, 2006, 1931, 1934, 1953, 1990, 1938, and 1939. As Jay Lehr, a senior
fellow and science director at the Heartland Institute, stated on CNN’s Lou
Dobbs  Tonight  program  in  December  2008,  “If  we  go  back  in  really
recorded  human  history,  in  the  13th  century  we  were  probably  7  degrees
Fahrenheit warmer than we are now.”13

Bear in mind that monthly, annual, decadal and much longer temperature
fluctuations  are  fundamental  aspects  of  Earth’s  dynamic  climate  history.
Also  remember  that  incredibly  complex  and  interactive  mechanisms  and
effects  of  those  changes  are  geographically  distributed  in  ways  that
confound global generalization. Most recently, NOAA’s National Climatic
Data Center reported that March, April, May and June of 2010 set records
for  the  warmest  year  worldwide  since  record-keeping  began  in  1880.

However,  June  was  actually  cooler  than  average  across  Scandinavia,
southeastern China, and the northwestern US according to the same report.14
NOAA  ground  stations  reported  the  June  average  to  be  1.22ºF  higher
than  normal,  while  NASA  satellite  data  showed  the  average  to  be  only
0.79ºF above a 20-year average. This made June 2010 the second warmest
in the short 32-year satellite temperature record, and the first six months of
2010 were also the second warmest. So what can we really deduce from all
of this to predict a trend? Not much of anything, and certainly nothing to be
alarmed about.

Climate, Carbon, and Conspirators

 

So, who stands to gain from climate science corruption? There are many
culprits, and they are becoming ever more powerful. Principal among these
are  certain  agenda-driven 
regulatory  agencies,
alternative  energy  and  environmental  lobbies,  and  yes,  the  UN  and  other
organizations that seek global resource and wealth redistribution. Many of
these organs of misinformation are joined at a common colon.

federal  government 

The IPCC has long served as the authoritative source of alarmist climate
change predictions cited in media and activist warm-mongering campaigns.
A  richly  funded  example  is  Al  Gore’s  Alliance  for  Climate  Protection
(ACP),  which  has  routinely  enlisted  celebrities  in  advertising  for  united
action  against  a  “climate  crisis.”  In  reality,  the  IPCC  only  conducts
literature reviews, although many of the publications it selectively cites are
produced by the same influential people that author its reports. Moreover,
illuminating  CRU  e-mails  revealed  that  a  small  group  within  that
organization actively worked to prevent research findings that contradicted
their  biases  from  being  published  in  leading  journals,  hence  blocking
dissenting views from being reviewed and cited in IPCC reports.

Global  warming  doom-speakers  and  promoters  of  fossil  energy
alternatives  are  united  behind  carbon-capping  politics.  Climate  change
alarm  drives  the  development  and  marketing  of  technologies  that  are
otherwise uncompetitive without major government support. Unwarranted
climate  fear,  combined  with  legitimate  public  concern  about  fossil-fuel
depletion  and  dependence  upon  foreign  oil,  is  promoted  to  justify  to
taxpayers  and  consumers  the  use  of  more  costly  energy  options.  Media

campaigns  portray  images  of  dying  polar  bears  as  fossil  fuel–generated
carbon casualties to support arguments against drilling in ANWR and, by
association,  other  national  oil  and  natural  gas  reserves.  Fossil-fuel  prices
rise higher, assisted by massive CO
 sequestration costs and de facto cap-
and-trade taxes, so consumers pay more, making alternatives seem all the
more attractive.

2

Does it seem remarkable that the US Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) applied a global warming argument to declare that CO
, the natural
molecule  essential  for  all  plant  life,  is  a  “pollutant”?  Might  that  possibly
have  to  do  with  a  larger  agenda  supported  by  the  EPA  and  other
organizations, such as wind and solar power lobbies and prospective carbon
brokers, to limit fossil fuel use by requiring costly carbon sequestration, in
turn making alternatives more price competitive, justifying subsidies, and
supporting cap-and-trade schemes? But of course, those purposes wouldn’t
fall within EPA responsibilities, would they? And they wouldn’t make any
sense at all if man-made carbon emissions didn’t pose a dire climate threat.
Yet consider the implications of the suppressed EPA “Internal Study on
Climate”  report  that  was  kept  under  wraps,  its  author  silenced,  due  to
pressure  to  support  the  agency’s  agenda  to  regulate  CO
.  Alan  Carlin,  a
senior  research  analyst  at  the  EPA’s  National  Center  for  Environmental
Economics (NCEE), had stated in thatreport that after examining numerous
global warming studies, his research showed the available observable data
to invalidate the hypothesis that humans cause dangerous global warming.
He  concluded,  “Given  the  downward  trend  in  temperatures  since  1998
(which some think will continue until at least 2030), there is no particular
reason to rush into decisions based upon a scientific hypothesis that does
not appear to explain most of the available data.”15

After  serving  with  the  EPA  for  38  years,  Alan  Carlin  was  taken  off
climate-related  work  and  was  forbidden  from  speaking  to  anyone  outside
the  organization  on  endangerment  issues  such  as  those  in  his  then-
suppressed  report.  A  then-proposed  “endangerment  finding”  under  the
Clean Air Act would enable the EPA to establish limits on CO
 and other
GHG  concentrations  as  threats  to  public  health,  directly  supporting  cap-
and-trade carbon regulations. That finding is now in force.

Bowing to pressure from global warming alarmists, the US Department
of the Interior (DOI) placed polar bears on its Endangered Species Act list
in 2008. Reported threats of massive melting in their habitats prompted this

2

2

2

action. While the act’s purview doesn’t extend to actually regulating GHGs,
there is little doubt that the classification establishes the species as poster
cubs  for  the  man-made  global  warming  movement.  It  also  supports
environmentalist opposition to oil and gas drilling in ANWR.

But are polar bear populations really declining, as tragically depicted in
Al  Gore’s  film,  An  Inconvenient  Truth?  Apparently  not,  according  to
Mitchell Taylor, manager of Wildlife Research for the Government of the
Canadian Territory of Nunavut, which monitors these conditions: “Of the
thirteen  populations  of  polar  bears  in  Canada,  eleven  are  stable  or
increasing in number. They are not going extinct [nor do they] even appear
to be affected at present … [It is] silly to present the demise of polar bears
based on media-assisted hysteria.”16

2

Cap-and-trade legislation, a major priority of President Barack Obama’s
administration,  has  no  defensible  purpose  without  a  supporting  global
warming rationale. It also makes no sense from an economic standpoint. It
will place onerous cost burdens upon energy consumers, continue to drive
businesses  overseas,  and  offer  no  real  climate  or  environmental  benefits
whatsoever.  Such  legislation  will  multiply  the  price  of  electricity  by
dramatically increasing coal plant construction and operating costs for CO
sequestration. While intended to make such “renewables” as wind and solar
more attractive, even this legislation won’t make them competitive without
large tax-supported subsidies. A new stock exchange would then be created
that  treats  (“bad”)  carbon  as  a  valuable  (“good”)  commodity,  providing
billions of profits for operators.

Al Gore, now a very wealthy “green energy” proponent, strongly lobbies
for  carbon-emission  trading  through  a  London-based  hedge  fund  called
Generation  Investment.  He  cofounded  the  company  with  David  Blood,
former head of investment management at Goldman Sachs, which in turn is
a  large  shareholder  in  the  Chicago  Climate  Exchange,  a  “voluntary  pilot
agency”  established  in  2003  to  advance  trading  in  US  carbon  emissions.
Both organizations are working hard to persuade governments to block new
power  plants  that  use  fossils.  Gore  exuberantly  told  members  at  a  March
2007 Joint House Hearing of the Energy and Science Committee: “As soon
as carbon has a price, you’re going to see a wave [of investment] in it …
There will be unchained investment.”17

Perhaps  the  most  serious  public  deception  perpetrated  by  this  “war
against climate change” (e.g., the carbon enemy) is the notion that cleaner,

sustainable  options  are  available  in  sufficient  abundance  to  replace
dependence upon fossil resources that currently provide about 85 percent of
all US energy. Regrettably, this is broadly recognized not to be the case at
all. Ironically, many of the same groups that champion environmental and
human causes are inhibiting progress toward vital solutions.

Extravagantly funded media campaigns continue to advertise a “climate
change crisis,” despite obvious evidence that the Earth began cooling once
more  at  least  a  decade  ago.  Meanwhile,  America’s  energy  and  industrial
progress is being held hostage by political and legal pressures applied by
groups  that  no  one  elected  to  represent  us,  and  industries  and  other
businesses that provide jobs and revenues are being driven overseas. And,
as  artificially  manipulated  energy  costs  continue  to  add  unsustainable
burdens  to  already  out-of-control  government  borrowing  and  spending
deficits,  those  impacts  will  fall  hardest  upon  people  who  can  least  afford
them.

Section One

Setting the Records Straight

Chapter 1

THE CHICKEN LITTLE SYNDROME

Former  vice  president  (now  Nobel  laureate)  Al  Gore,  Time
magazine,  and  numerous  other  sources  have  proclaimed  that  the  climate
debate  has  officially  ended.  The  Earth  is  warming,  the  consequences  are

dire,  and  humans—  along  with  our  technologies  of  destruction—are  the
cause.  Our  only  hope,  it  seems,  is  to  implement  extremely  stringent  cap-
and-trade  legislation  to  drastically  reduce  horrifically  polluting  carbon
dioxide  (CO
)  emissions  spewing  from  fossil-fueled  smokestacks  and  to
switch  to  clean  energy  alternatives  that  are  claimed  to  be  most  assuredly
abundant.

As  I  mentioned  earlier,  Time’s  March  2006  cover  proclaimed,  “Global
Warming: Be Worried, Be Very Worried.” Polar ice caps are melting faster
than  ever;  rising  waters  will  flood  coastal  communities;  more  and  more
areas are being devastated by droughts; and by any measure, Earth is at the
tipping point—all because of us.

Fear and guilt are powerful motivators for those who care, and most of us
really  do.  Some  who  purport  to  be  even  more  caring  and  knowledgeable
about basic concerns we all share have become adept at pulling our guilt
strings.  Their  tactics  are  often  most  effective  when,  with  a  pretense  of
superior moral authority, they project really horrific consequences onto that
guilt. This brands doubters as deniers of inconvenient truths recognized by
all truly smart and informed experts. Maybe you have heard some of that.

2

A  basic  tactic  used  by  calculating  “hysteria  hypesters”  is  to  treat
propaganda  as  obvious  fact.  The  Institute  for  Public  Policy  Research,  a
British think tank, has advocated a way to induce “mass behavior change”
to combat global warming by nurturing a new “common sense”: “[We] need
to work in a more shrewd and contemporary way, using subtle techniques of
engagement . . . The facts need to be treated as being so taken for granted
that  they  need  not  be  spoken  .  .  .  It  amounts  to  treating  climate-friendly
activity as a brand that can be sold. This is, we believe, the route to mass
behavior changes.”1

Just how well are those guilt and scare tactics succeeding? An emerging
market  for  “eco-therapists”  who  specialize  in  treating  “eco-anxiety”
suggests that those tactics are working quite well. For instance, a February
16,  2008,  New  York  Times  article  reported  that  more  than  120  of  these
specialists  are  now  listed  in  the  field  of  “ecopsychology”  to  help  people
who  are  excessively  worried  that  their  own  carbon  emissions  are  causing
global  warming.  The  International  Community  for  Ecopsychology’s
definition refers to that term as “a synergetic relationship between planetary
and personal well-being” and states that “the needs of one are relevant to
the  other.”  Some  schools,  including  Lewis  &  Clark  College  in  Portland,

Oregon, have created courses on counseling such patients. Sarah Edwards
explained to Fox News in April of that year that eco-anxiety (manifested in
feelings of fear, grief, anger, confusion, and depression) caused her shoulder
pain, fibromyalgia, and fatigue. Her reasoning may go pandemic: A British
independent news source has reported that eco-anxiety has been blamed for
symptoms  ranging  from  overeating  and  bulimia  to  depression  and  even
alcoholism.2

This seems to raise another threat for Mr. Gore to consider: Is it possible

that rising CO

 levels are making people crazy?

2

All this might seem comical if not for the fact that a number of people are
deeply  troubled  with  alarm  and  guilt  about  human  impacts  upon  climate
change. A particularly tragic case involved an Argentine family. In March
2010, Francisco Lotero and Miriam Coletti shot two of their children before
killing themselves after making an apparent suicide pact over fears about
effects of global warming. Although their 2-year-old son, Francisco, died
instantly, their unnamed 7-monthold infant daughter remarkably survived.

Galloping Glaciers

 

This  isn’t  the  first  time  that  prominent  news  publishers,  supported  by
scientific  experts,  have  warned  us  about  perils  of  uncorrected  climate
changes. On October 7, 1912, for example, the Los Angeles Times alerted
readers, “Fifth Ice Age Is on the Way: Human Race Will Have to Fight for
Existence in Cold.” By August 9, 1923, the situation had already become
desperate,  causing  the  Chicago  Tribune  to  declare  on  its  front  page,
“Scientist Says Arctic Ice Will Wipe Out Canada.” A complementary story
posited that huge parts of Asia and Europe were also threatened. The world
soon appeared to be warming again by the 1930s, however, causing some
scientists and news reporters to suggest that CO

 might be the cause.

By  the  1940s,  it  became  apparent  that  global  mean  temperatures  had
begun to fall once again, which through the 1970s led to concerns that the
Earth was once more heading toward a new Ice Age. Advancing glaciers
presented renewed threats to human settlements in Alaska, Iceland, Canada,
China, and the Soviet Union.

In  1973,  Science  Digest  concluded,  “At  this  point  we  do  not  have  the
comfortable distance of tens of thousands of years to prepare for the next

2

Ice Age, and that how carefully we monitor our atmospheric pollution will
have  direct  bearing  on  the  arrival  and  nature  of  this  weather  crisis.”
Consequently, the scientists warned, “Once the freeze starts, it will be too
late.”3

In a June 1974 article titled “Another Ice Age?” Time observed, “When
meteorologists take an average of temperatures around the globe, they find
the atmosphere has been gradually cooler for the past three decades . . . and
the weather aberrations they are studying may be the harbinger of another
Ice Age.”4

The  March  1,  1975,  cover  of  the  respected  Science  News  magazine
depicted the city of New York being swallowed by an approaching glacier
and announced, “The Ice Age Cometh.” The threat was clear and urgent:
“Again,  this  transition  would  induce  only  a  small  change  in  global
temperature—two  or  three  degrees—but  the  impact  on  civilization  would
be catastrophic.” The New York Times followed suit with a headline story:
“Scientists  Ponder  Why  World’s  Climate  Is  Changing;  A  Major  Cooling
Widely Considered to Be Inevitable.”5

The prestigious National Academy of Sciences agreed with this view. In
1975, it issued a warning that there was a “finite possibility that a serious
worldwide  cooling  could  befall  the  Earth  within  the  next  100  years.”6
Popular publications echoed and amplified the alarm. The title of a book by
science writer Lowell Ponte, published that same year, pretty much summed
up the crisis: The Cooling: Has the Next Ice Age Already Begun? Can We
Survive  It?  He  warned  that  “global  cooling  presents  humankind  with  the
most important social, political, and adaptive challenge we have had to deal
with for 110,000 years.”7The Genesis Strategy, published a year later, had a
similar  message.  Noteworthy  is  that  the  author,  Stephen  Schneider,  has
subsequently  changed  his  course  of  concern  180  degrees  and  has  now
become a prominent global warming authority. The same shift of position is
true  for  Crispin  Tickell,  who  wrote  Climate  Change  and  World  Affairs
(published in 1977), an influential book of that period.

A New Crisis Emerges

 

By  the  late  1970s,  observed  rising  world  temperatures  heralded  the
coming  of  new  media  sensations.  Climate  model  calculations,  including

2

some  at  Princeton’s  Geophysical  Fluid  Dynamic  Laboratory,  began  to
predict  that  substantial  global  warming  could  result  from  increasing
atmospheric  CO
  levels.  At  the  time,  those  projections  were  generally
regarded to be an interesting but largely academic exercise, even by many
of  the  scientists  involved.  But  about  10  years  later  the  theory  gained
worldwide attention following testimony in 1988 by NASA’s James Hansen
before  then-Senator  Al  Gore’s  Committee  on  Science,  Technology  and
Space.  When  queried  by  Gore  (D-TN),  Hansen  stated  that  he  was  99
percent certain that temperatures had in fact increased, and that there had
been  some  greenhouse  warming,  although  he  made  no  direct  connection
between  the  two.  This  observation  was  consistent  with  concerns  about  a
particularly warm summer that year in some US regions.

The  scheduling  and  staging  of  Senator  Gore’s  hearings  were  carefully
orchestrated. As later recounted by his co planner Senator Timothy Wirth
(D-CO) in an interview with PBS Frontline: “We called the Weather Bureau
and found out what historically was the hottest day of the summer…so we
scheduled the hearing that day, and bingo, it was the hottest day on record
in Washington, or close to it…we went in the night before and opened all
the windows so that the air conditioning wasn’t working inside the room.”8
Although the general response within the small community of scientists
engaged in large-scale climate research was critical regarding use of highly
uncertain model results as a basis for determining important public policy
decisions,  many  did  agree  that  increased  atmospheric  CO
  levels  could
possibly  have  influenced  the  changes  in  temperature.  Their  agreement,
however,  did  not  warrant  the  greatly  exaggerated  claims  that  began  to
appear  in  the  popular  US  and  European  media  by  early  1989  that  “all
scientists” agreed that warming was real and had catastrophic potential.

2

Scientists  who  took  issue  with  these  “objective  facts”  were  often
subjected to painful consequences. Lester Lave, a professor of economics at
Carnegie Mellon University, reported that he was dismissed from one of the
hearings  for  even  suggesting  the  global  warming  issue  was  controversial.
The late Reginald Newell, a meteorology professor at MIT, believed that he
had lost National Science Foundation funding for data analyses that were
failing  to  show  net  warming  over  the  past  century  because  reviewers
suggested his results were dangerous to humanity.

As  the  Cold  War  ended  in  the  late  1980s,  the  Union  of  Concerned
Scientists,  an  organization  originally  devoted  to  nuclear  disarmament,

actively  turned  its  attention  to  the  new  cause.  In  1989,  they  circulated  a
much-publicized petition that was published in the New York Times, urging
recognition  of  global  warming  as  a  potentially  great  danger  to  mankind.
Seven  hundred  scientists,  including  many  members  of  the  National
Academy  of  Sciences  and  some  Nobel  laureates,  signed  that  petition.
Merely  three  or  four  of  the  signers,  however,  had  any  involvement  with
climatology. The article helped to solidify the desired public perception that
all scientists agree with the global warming disaster scenario.9

In  specific  reference  to  the  petition,  the  president  of  the  National
Academy of Sciences warned its members at their 1990 annual meeting not
to  lend  their  credibility  to  issues  about  which  they  have  no  special
knowledge.  His  warning  came  too  late:  Exaggerated  claims  based  upon
meager  scientific  evidence  had  already  become  the  gospel  for  a  new
religious  fervor.  Claudine  Schneider,  a  US  congresswoman  from  Rhode
Island, expressed the tenets of the new orthodoxy at a 1989 Tufts University
global  warming  symposium  when  she  said,  “Scientists  may  disagree,  but
we can hear Mother Earth, and she is crying.” What caring person would
want that? After all, scientists are people too.

Political pressures on global warming dissidents increased when Senator
Gore admonished skeptics in a featured  New York Times op-ed piece and
associated “true believers” with Galileo. In another article, he compared the
warm summer of 1988 to Kristallnacht, which ushered in the Holocaust.

Well-known entertainment figures joined politicians and activist groups
to rally more followers: In 1989, Robert Redford proclaimed at a meeting
he hosted at his Sundance, Utah, ranch that it was time to stop the research
and  begin  acting  (a  subject  he  was  more  familiar  with).  Barbra  Streisand
financially  supported  the  research  of  Michael  Oppenheimer  (at  the
Environmental  Defense  Fund),  who  was  a  global  warming  activist,  not  a
climatologist.  Meryl  Streep  presented  an  impassioned  public  television
appeal  to  stop  warming.  There  should  be  no  doubt  that  their  pleas  were
truly  sincere  and  caring.  Perhaps  this  applies  to  many  others  termed
“skeptics” (agnostics) and, even worse, “deniers” (atheists) as well? Can’t
they be sincere and caring environmentalists, too?

Wages of War

 

The  April  2008  cover  feature  of  Time  drew  a  direct  and  unseemly
parallel  between  US  involvement  in  World  War  II  against  Nazi  Germany
and Japan and the current battle against climate change. The famous image
of five American Marines raising a flag at Iwo Jima following a terrible 35-
day battle during which sixty-eight hundred American soldiers were killed
was  changed  to  depict  the  Marines  planting  a  tree,  and  the  caption  read,
“How to Win the War on Global Warming.”

Climate war marketing has become a large business, and it’s becoming
much  bigger  with  substantial  help  from  an  organization  founded  by  Al
Gore,  called  the  Alliance  for  Climate  Protection  (ACP).  The  alliance  has
launched a $300 million climate crisis media campaign over a 3-year period
to  promote  GHG  reductions  through  a  new  international  treaty,  US
legislation,  and  other  initiatives.  Advertisements  are  already  appearing  in
nationwide  television,  print,  radio,  and  online  media,  targeted  to  diverse
audiences.  As  Al  Gore  stated,  “NASCAR  fans,  churchgoers,  labor-union
members,  small  businessmen,  engineers,  hunters,  spokesmen,  corporate
leaders,  you  name  it—where  public  opinion  goes,  federal  policy  will
follow.” An example is an early television segment, narrated by William H.
Macy,  showing  footage  of  American  soldiers  storming  beaches  at
Normandy during World War II, a civil rights march, and a Moon landing.
The  message  links  these  critical  points  in  history  to  an  urgent  need  for
action now: “We can’t wait for someone else to solve the climate crisis. We
need  to  act,  and  we  need  to  act  now.  Join  us.  Together  we  can  solve  the
climate crisis.”10

And the solution? Although the message doesn’t quite tell us, it’s actually
very clear: We should all support the war against climate change. And the
answer,  of  course,  is  to  support  carbon  cap-and-trade  legislation  and
alternative energy subsidies.

Although major donor sources are not known, it is understood that large
ACP contributions have been provided by from such billionaire luminaries
as George Soros; CNN founder Ted Turner; Sun Microsystems cofounder
Vinod Khoska; and Apple CEO Steve Jobs. (Mr. Gore sits on Apple’s board
of directors.)11 Al Gore is contributing his salary as a partner in the venture
capital firm of Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers to the alliance, along with
his Nobel winnings ($750,000) and proceeds from his movie and his book,
An  Inconvenient  Truth.  This  does  not  include  the  investment  income  he
garners  from  Kleiner  (much  greater  than  salary  and  taxed  at  lower  than

ordinary  income  rates),  yet  his  strong  personal  commitment  to  alliance’s
goals  is  irrefutable.  There  should  be  no  doubt  regarding  his  genuine
dedication to the cause.12

At least you have to give Al Gore credit for putting his money where his
mouth  is,  while  also  feeding  it  from  profits  he  receives  from  the  climate
change war. For example, he has invested $35 million with the Capricorn
Investment Group, a firm that Bloomberg News says puts clients’ assets into
hedge funds and invests in “makers of environmentally friendly products.”
Capricorn  was  founded  by  billionaire  Jeffrey  Skoll,  who  produced  Mr.
Gore’s “documentary,” An Inconvenient Truth. That’s quite a large sum for
someone whose estimated total assets in 2000 were between $800,000 and
$1.9 million.13

Since  his  nonelection  to  the  presidency,  Mr.  Gore  has  been  very
successful as an eco-multimillionaire, with an estimated net worth well in
excess  of  $100  million.  In  addition  to  his  six-figure  speaking  gigs,  he
signed  on  as  an  adviser  to  Google  in  2001—before  it  went  public—and
received  stock  options  now  reportedly  valued  at  more  than  $30  million.
When he joined Apple’s board in 2003, he received stock options believed
to be valued now at about $6 million. In 2004, Mr. Gore and some partners
purchased the Canadian news network News World International (NWI) for
$70  million  and  renamed  it  Current  TV.  His  investment  partners  were
former Goldman Sachs senior director Philip Murphy (Democratic Finance
Committee  chair);  Richard  Blum  (husband  of  California  senator  Dianne
Feinstein); Sun Micro-systems cofounder Bill Joy; and Bill Pittman, former
AOL Time Warner CEO.14

Fast  Money,  in  an  article  titled  “Al  Gore’s  $100  Million  Makeover,”
quotes  Philip  Murphy’s  recollections  of  the  time  in  2003  when  Mr.  Gore
was struggling to launch the Current TV cable network and also starting a
hedge  fund  (now  with  more  than  a  billion  dollars  in  assets)  called
Generation Investment Management (GIM). According to Gore, both were
created with a desire “to incorporate sustainability values into the financial-
services  work  I  was  doing.”  Murphy  had  introduced  Gore  to  his  GIM
partner,  David  Blood,  formerly  with  Goldman  Sachs,  and  “they  were
asking, ‘can this make money? Can this be a business?’” Apparently, the
answer was (and still is) strongly affirmative.15

Good News! It’s Terrifying—and It’s Our Fault!

 

Government,  corporate,  and  private  climate  change  research  funding
depends upon delivering results the sponsors want. What if it turned out that
climate  change  follows  natural  cycles,  and  for  good  or  for  bad,  we  don’t
have a lot to say or do about it? That would qualify as a true climate change
disaster for thousands of scientists, administrators, and their families, whose
work  and  lives  have  come  to  depend  upon  causes  that  are  anthropogenic
(resulting  from  the  influence  of  human  beings  on  nature;  hereafter  used
interchangeably with “man-made”).

Let  there  be  no  mistake:  As  most  of  us  recognize,  environmental
scientists are among Earth’s most dedicated and caring inhabitants—people
who  are  as  principled  and  ethical  as  humans  come.  Few,  if  any,  selected
their  profession  for  its  financial  potential,  and  their  education  and
competencies  warrant  true  respect.  Many  are  associated  with  universities
and others with government agencies. They write scholarly papers; compete
for  publishing  opportunities  in  selective  journals;  present  peer-reviewed
papers at global conferences; spend countless hours writing grant proposals;
and yes, participate in the United Nations’ IPPC scientific working groups.
Okay. Enough pandering.

The stark reality is that climate sciences have become strongly politicized
over the global warming issue. Some of the strongest proponents of human-
caused  climate  change  theories  in  Congress,  for  example,  are  among  the
strongest supporters of those funding programs. Government agencies that
receive  and  distribute  these  funds  find  it  necessary  to  demonstrate  that
threats are real and urgent in order to justify budgets and demonstrate public
benefits.  Philanthropic  organizations  routinely  give  out  large  sums  of
research money on the same alarmist basis. An example is the MacArthur
Foundation,  which  earmarks  $500,000  no-strings-attached  grants  for
climatologists who speak out about global warming threats.16

An  inescapable  fact  is  that  climate  change  politics  has  had  apparent
partisan  leanings.  Climate  Science  Watch  (a  nonprofit  public  interest
education  and  advocacy  project  “dedicated  to  holding  public  officials
accountable for the integrity and effectiveness with which they use climate
science  and  related  research  in  government  policymaking”)  has  been
strongly critical of US Climate Change Science Program (CCSP) cutbacks
under Republican influences since the program peaked in 1995. That was

when Republicans gained control of both houses of Congress. In February
2002,  the  first  year  the  George  W.  Bush  administration  gained  major
influence  over  the  federal  budget,  interagency  climate  research  budgets
were reduced to 1993 levels. Then, after the 2006 election cycle brought a
new Democratic majority in both the House and the Senate, the dynamic
changed  to  restore  more  funding  to  the  “starved”  climate  programs  and
create new ones through twelve different 2008 bills approved by the Senate
Appropriations  Committee.  Various  Office  of  Management  and  Budget
(OMB)  reports  projected  CCSP  increases  of  $155  million  for  February
2007 and $282 million for 2008.17

A  National  Academy  of  Sciences/National  Research  Council  analysis
report  reviewing  CCSP  funding  cutbacks  under 
the  Bush-Cheney
administration wasn’t positive; it concluded that “U.S. capability to monitor
trends, document the impacts of future climate change, and further improve
prediction and assimilation models … will decline even as the urgency of
addressing climate change increases.” This conclusion is not surprising. The
National  Academy  of  Sciences  has  always  enthusiastically  supported
expensive  climate  research  programs,  and  it  has  taken  strong  stances
supporting  both  global  cooling  and  global  warming  models,  shifting
positions  in  concert  with  weather  patterns.  The  academy,  along  with  the
numerous institutions it represents, depends upon billions of federal dollars
to fund thousands of research projects, tens of thousands of PhD degrees
(along  with  many  more  associate  positions),  and  dozens  of  professional
journals that publish the results.18

Democrats  and  Democrat-backed  institutions  are  almost  invariably  the
ones  who  support  the  United  Nations’  efforts  to  use  global  warming  to
promote worldwide wealth redistribution. It is ironic to see IPCC political
officials  challenging  the  objectivity  of  scientists  who  don’t  subscribe  to
their clearly demonstrated and well-documented biases. A case in point is
when  their  “Climate  Change  1995  Summary  for  Policymakers”  report
stated they had found a “human fingerprint” as evidence of anthropogenic
global  warming.  The  author  of  that  particular  science  chapter,  a  US
government  employee, 
to  having  made
“backroom”  changes  under  pressure  from  top  US  governmental  officials.
The  report  had  been  edited  to  remove  five  different  statements—all  of
which  had  been  approved  by  the  panel’s  scientific  consultants—that  had
specifically said no such evidence had been found. The IPCC, to this day,

finally  publicly  admitted 

has  never  offered  real  evidence  to  support  its  assertion  that  humans  are
causing  global  warming.19  Yet  without  humans  as  the  cause  of  global
warming,  there  is  no  way  to  develop  widespread  support  for  the  global
warming funding bonanza.

US Climate Science: Growth of a New Industry

 

Global  warming,  aka  climate  change,  has  been  a  natural  blessing  to
government  agencies  and  researchers  that  undertake  climate  science
research. Growth of US government funding in this new industry has been
phenomenal: It increased from $209 million in 1989, when the subject first
began  to  heat  up  following  then-Senator  Gore’s  1988  Committee  on
Science, Technology and Space hearings, to a proposed $1.446 billion (in
2005 dollars) in 2008. That’s nearly a 200 percent rise. The largest player in
this  arena  in  2008  was  NASA  ($816  million  in  2008),  followed  by  the
National  Science  Foundation  ($145  million),  the  US  Department  of
Commerce and NOAA ($163 million), and the US Department of Energy
(DOE;  $122  million).  Comparatively  paltry  budgets  were  awarded  to  the
US Department of Agriculture ($55 million), the DOE’s Office of Health,
Safety and Security ($47 million), and the EPA ($17 million), plus a few
others.20

Notably,  the  EPA’s  climate  budget  has  since  become  much  more
generous, with $112 million included by the Obama-Biden administration
for FY 2010.

That’s  only  part  of  it.  According  to  a  2007  press  release  by  the  White
House  Office  of  Science  and  Technology,  the  US  was  already  spending
about  $5  billion  per  year  on  climate  research  through  various  programs.
This was more than twice the amount spent on sending humans to the Moon
during the Apollo program (about $2.3 billion per year). But then, the Moon
doesn’t  have  a  climate  to  study,  and  even  if  it  did,  we  probably  couldn’t
blame the Industrial Revolution for changing it.21

to  capture 

Climate  change  began 

the  attention  of  US  security
organizations following the Yom Kippur Arab-Israeli war of 1973 because
of  this  nation’s  increasing  concerns  about  continued  dependence  upon
foreign oil imports. This provided the foundation for expanded government
investment  in  science  programs  that  connected  energy  priorities  with

environmental  issues  that  have  broad  public  appeal  and  support.  “Saving
the planet” has become a popular theme to justify expanding budgets.22

NASA  brought  satellite  Earth  surface  and  atmospheric  sensing
capabilities to climate science research, applying technologies and expertise
from  the  Mercury  and  Gemini  programs  of  the  1960s.  Its  2008  climate
change research budget in constant 2005 dollars was more than thirty-five
times larger than was reported in 1989, but it was reduced in 2006 by about
6 percent below the 2005 level.

One of the casualties of NASA’s climate science cutbacks was the Deep
Space Climate Observatory (DSCOVR) satellite proposed in 1998 by then-
Vice President Gore for Earth observations. Republican critics derided the
$100 million system, nicknamed “GoreSat,” as an “overpriced screensaver”
with unfocused purposes; it has since been held in storage at the cost of $1
million per year.

The  most  outspoken  critic  of  NASA’s  priorities  and  the  Bush-Cheney
administration’s  climate  change  policies  was  James  Hansen  (who,  as  I
mentioned  earlier,  was  Gore’s  star  global  warming  testifier  at  his  1988
Senate hearings). In his capacity as director of GISS, Dr. Hansen expressed
his disagreement very strongly during a 2004 speech at the University of
Iowa,  where  he  also  publicly  announced  his  support  for  the  presidential
campaign  of  Senator  John  Kerry  (D-MA).  In  2001,  Hansen  had  been  the
recipient  of  a  $250,000  award  from  the  Heinz  Foundation,  headed  by
Senator Kerry’s wife, Teresa Heinz, a circumstance that made the political
endorsement  by  a  prominent  NASA  civil  servant  appear  particularly
suspect.

Hansen  was  never  the  least  bit  hesitant  about  speaking  out  against  the
Bush  administration  and  NASA  policies  regarding  global  warming  in
general and their lack of support for aggressive GHG abatement measures
in particular.23 In a January 29, 2006, interview published in the New York
Times, he charged that NASA public relations officials had pressured him to
allow  them  to  review  future  public  lectures,  papers,  and  postings  on  the
GISS website. This followed a December 6, 2005, presentation he gave to
the American Geophysical Union, during which he stated that the Earth’s
climate  is  approaching  a  tipping  point  that  will  result  in  the  loss  of  the
Arctic  as  we  know  it,  with  sea  levels  rising  as  much  as  80  feet  and  thus
flooding  coastal  areas.  He  warned  that  this  could  be  halted  only  if  GHG
emissions are reduced within the next 25 years.24

And  that  was  the  good  news.  In  a  paper  titled  “Is  There  Still  Time  to
Avoid  Disastrous  Effects?”  presented  at  a  Climate  Change  Research
Conference held in Sacramento, California, on September 13, 2006, Hansen
added  hellfire  for  the  damned:  “Melting  ice  caps  will  raise  sea  levels  by
between 32 and 78 feet, forcing millions to seek refuge; increasingly violent
weather patterns will cause major destruction and as the land dries up, bush
fires will be more frequent.”

After  the  master  of  disaster  claimed  to  have  received  threats  of
recrimination  for  continuing  to  speak  out,  he  was  offered  support  by  two
organizations.  One  was 
the  Government  Accountability  Project,  a
Washington, DC, law firm that volunteered legal support in a suit against
NASA.  The  other  was  George  Soros  through  his  Open  Society  Institute
(OSI), as part of its Politicization of Science program. (Yes, that’s what they
really call it!) As reported in a September 24, 2007, editorial published in
the Investor’s Business Daily, titled “The Soros Threat to Democracy,” OSI
may have supported Hansen to the tune of up to $750,000 out of that fund.
Dr. Hansen has denied receiving any money, and there is no proof that he
did. Yet he was listed as an “OSI grantee” in the “2006 Soros Foundation
Network Report.” George Soros, like Al Gore and John Kerry, was not a big
George W. Bush fan.

The Science Unanimity Myth

 

Widely  circulated  statements  that  scientists  unanimously  agree  about
global  warming  and  human  contributions  to  it  or  the  importance  and
consequences of it are patently false. The apparent purpose of such claims
is to discredit those with opposing viewpoints, deriding them with contempt
previously  reserved  for  those  who  deny  the  Holocaust,  the  dangers  of
tobacco,  and  the  achievements  of  NASA’s  Apollo  program.  Al  Gore  has
little  tolerance  for  unbelievers,  as  evidenced  in  this  statement:  “Fifteen
percent of the population believes the Moon landing was staged in a movie
lot in America, and somewhat fewer believe the Earth is flat. I think they
should all get together with the global warming deniers on a Saturday night
and party.”25

“Scientific  consensus” 

to  scary  climate
projections  have  played  well  to  legitimize  highly  speculative  research

representations  attached 

conclusions  useful  to  justify  additional  funding,  sell  newspapers,  and
enhance  television  audience  ratings.  But  several  petitions  and  surveys
involving science communities present a far from unified picture.26

•    In  1992,  a  “Statement  of  Atmospheric  Scientists  on  Greenhouse
Warming”  that  opposed  global  controls  on  GHG  emissions  drew
about 100 signatures, mostly from American Meteorological Society
technical committee members.27

•  In 1992, a “Heidelberg Appeal,” which also expressed skepticism on
the  urgency  of  restraining  GHG  emissions,  drew  more  than  4,000
signatures from scientists worldwide.28

•  In 1996, a “Leipzig Declaration on Climate Change” that emerged
from an international conference addressing the GHG controversy,
was signed by more than 100 scientists in climatology and related
fields.29

•    In  1997,  a  survey  of  American  state  climatologists  (the  official
climate monitors in each of the fifty states) found 90 percent agreed
that “scientific evidence indicates variations in global temperatures
are  likely  to  be  naturally  occurring  and  cyclical  over  very  long
periods of time.”30

that  “climate  prediction 

•    In  2001,  the  American  Association  of  State  Climatologists
concluded 
is  complex,  with  many
uncertainties;  the  AASC  recognizes  climate  prediction  is  an
extremely difficult undertaking. For time scales of a decade or more,
understanding  the  empirical  accuracy  of  such  prediction—called
verification—is simply impossible, since we have to wait a decade
or more to assess the accuracy of the forecasts.”31

•    In  May  2007,  a  survey  of  530  climate  scientists  by  the  Heartland
Institute  revealed  that  only  about  one-half  agreed  that  “climate
change is mostly the result of anthropogenic causes,” and only one-
third  of  those  agreed  that  “climate  models  can  accurately  predict
conditions in the future.”32

•  In April 2008, the results of a survey of 489 scientists, conducted by
the Statistical Assessment Service (STATS), indicated that most (74
percent)  believed  that  some  human-induced  greenhouse  warming
has  occurred,  up  from  41  percent  reported  in  the  1991  Gallup

survey.  Only  41  percent  of  those  polled,  however,  said  they  were
directly involved in any aspect of global climate science.33

•  In 2008, a US Senate minority report issued by Senator James Inhofe
(R-OK) presents the testimony of 650 climate-related scientists from
around  the  world  who  strongly  challenge  global  warming  crisis
claims.  They  include  a  Nobel  laureate  and  former  IPCC  study
participants.

•    In  March  2009,  more  than  600  skeptical  people  attended  a
conference organized by the Heartland Institute in New York City to
protest  cap-and-trade  regulations  favored  by  President  Obama  that
would roll GHG emissions back to 1990s levels. President Vaclav
Klaus  of  Czech  Republic  delivered  the  keynote  speech.  Speaking
again the next day to Columbia University faculty and students, he
reaffirmed his strong opposition to a concept that global warming is
man-made. “The problem is not global warming … by the ideology
which uses or misuses it—it has gradually turned the most efficient
vehicle  for  advocating  extensive  government  intervention  into  all
fields  of  life  and  for  suppressing  human  freedom  and  economic
prosperity.”34

Scientific questions and disputes will never be resolved by opinion poll
tabulations. If that were the case we might now be fleeing in seal-oil fueled
snowmobiles  the  ravages  of  the  miles-thick  glaciers  predicted  a  few
decades ago. Yet it is disingenuous to suggest that the debate is over. Or if it
is, that will come as a big disappointment to those with a few remaining
contrary opinions that they may be required to abandon by majority vote. In
fact,  some  man-made  warming  proponents  are  attempting  to  discredit
skeptical scientific opinions out of existence altogether.

For instance, in a December 2004 article titled “Beyond the Ivory Tower:
The  Scientific  Consensus  on  Climate  Change,”  published  in  the  journal
Science,  Naomi  Oreskes,  a  University  of  California–San  Diego  history
professor, reported that her search of the Internet under the term “climate
change”  turned  up  928  studies,  based  on  which  she  cheerfully  concluded
that there was complete scientific agreement.35

Few,  if  any,  scientific  papers  claim  to  “refute”  the  theory  of  human-
induced warming, and a search under the term “climate cycles” rather than
“climate  change”  would  have  produced  a  different  result.  Hundreds  of

Issues  of  debate  cannot  be  resolved  by  claims  that  a  consensus  among
authorities has settled the matters so long as a minority, even a small one,
believes  otherwise.  Objective  science  and  progress  have  always  been
advanced by those who have proven that simple lesson.

If  global  warming  crisis  skeptics  and  deniers  are  heretics,  they  may
perhaps  take  some  comfort  in  the  fact  that  their  numbers  are  rapidly
growing. This is particularly true in the US. A 2010 Gallup poll indicates
that the percentage of respondents who said they worry “a great deal” about
global warming was only 28 percent, down from 33 percent in 2009 and 41
percent in 2007, when worry peaked. Global warming ranked last of eight
environmental issues listed in the survey.37

studies have been published that discuss potentially important and dominant
natural  forces  that  influence  global  warming  and  cooling  over  both  short
and  very  long  periods,  including  solar  climate-forcing  factors  (hereafter
referred to at times simply as climate forcings).36

Gallup  also  conducted  a  2010  poll  that  asked  the  question  “Thinking
about  what  is  said  in  the  news,  in  your  view  is  the  seriousness  of  global
warming  generally 
correct,  or  generally
underestimated?” In just 4 years the percentage of Americans who believe
global warming has been exaggerated has grown by 60 percent, constituting
48 percent of the respondents.38

exaggerated,  generally 

Chapter 2

COOKING THE CLIMATE BOOKS

Departing from responsible science recipes.

No one can confidently forecast global, national, or even regional
weather  conditions  that  will  occur  months  or  years  into  the  future,  much
less predict climate changes and impacts that will be realized over decadal,
centennial,  and  longer  periods.  Nevertheless,  this  broadly  recognized
limitation  has  not  dissuaded  doomsday  climate  predictions  that  have
captured  worldwide  media  attention.  Such  postulations  attach  great
credence  to  extreme  speculations,  incomplete  data,  and  overly  simplistic
computer  models  that  have  never  demonstrated  accuracy.  Given  the  huge
uncertainties, and under great pressures to produce definitive conclusions,
modelers hedge many projections with probabilistic language that gets them

off  the  hook  of  accountability.  The  pronouncements  are  typically  cast  as
percentile chances that something or other may happen, or simply that such
an  event  is  more  or  less  likely  to  happen  than  not.  Truly  alarming
possibilities are usually treated as most newsworthy.

Fog in the Crystal Ball of Climate Forecasts

 

Scientists who study climate change phenomena generally fall into two
professional camps. Meteorologists tend to recognize the inherent, almost
biological complexity of the overall climate system and view it as resilient
and  “self-healing.”  As  a  group  they  are  usually  more  skeptical  about  the
importance  of  global  warming  and  less  confident  about  climate  model
results.  Physicists,  on  the  other  hand,  are  accustomed  to  reducing  the
behavior  of  a  physical  system  (e.g.,  climate)  to  a  minimum  number  of
mathematical equations in order to study it. They have a simpler view of
climate  forcings,  and  they  tend  to  have  more  confidence  in  models  as
predictive tools.1

Even the most sophisticated climate models must be simplified to run on
present-day computers, which aren’t nearly fast enough to handle all known
processes  with  a  high  level  of  definition.  Not  even  really  big,  three-
dimensional  general  circulation  models  (GCMs),  which  are  capable  of
tracking more than 5 million different variables at any given time, can do
the trick. Those variables include climate influences associated with these
factors,  among  hundreds  of  others:  upper  atmosphere  jet  streams;  deep
ocean currents; variations in radiant energy from the Sun; amounts of solar
radiation  reflected  back  to  space  by  ice  sheets  and  glaciers;  seasonal
vegetation patterns; atmospheric GHG and aerosol changes; eddies in the
oceans  that  transfer  heat  laterally;  and  numbers,  types,  and  altitudes  of
clouds.2

Since  GCMs  must  process  enormous  amounts  of  complex  data,  they
require  very  expensive  supercomputers 
that  only  wealthy  national
governments  can  afford.  Prominent  US  systems  are  located  at  NASA’s
GISS,  the  US  National  Center  for  Atmospheric  Research,  NOAA’s
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, and Britain’s Hadley Centre. Yet
with all their computing power, even the EPA urges caution in taking results
too literally: “These complicated models are able to simulate many features

of  the  climate,  but  they  are  still  not  accurate  enough  to  provide  reliable
forecasts of how the climate may change.”3

Very  small  model  errors  associated  with  reference  data,  or  underlying
assumptions  regarding  climate-forcing  mechanisms  and  interactions,  can
yield very large errors in outputs. Such errors are inescapable and expand
rapidly as a function of the projected forecast period. Because the accuracy
cannot  be  tested  prior  to  that  yet-unrealized  future  time,  results  are
compared  with  those  yielded  by  other  modelers  for  general  validation,
although all these may be very wrong.

Roy Spencer, a principal research scientist at the University of Alabama,
Huntsville,  and  former  senior  scientist  for  climate  studies  at  NASA,
observes  that  results  of  the  one  or  two  dozen  climate  modeling  groups
around the world often reflect a common bias. One reason is that many of
these  modeling  programs  are  based  upon  the  same  “parameterization”
assumptions; consequently, common errors are likely to be systematic, often
missing 
important  processes.  Such  problems  arise  because  basic
components  and  dynamics  of  the  climate  system  aren’t  understood  well
enough on either theoretical or observational grounds to even put into the
models. Instead, the models focus upon those factors and relationships that
are most familiar, ignoring others altogether. As Spencer notes, “Scientists
don’t like to talk about that because we can’t study things we don’t know
about.”4

Joanne Simpson, who recently died at age eighty-six, developed some of
the  first  mathematical  models  of  clouds  in  attempts  to  better  understand
how hurricanes draw power from warm seas. Ranked as one of the world’s
top meteorologists, she believed that global warming theorists place entirely
too much emphasis upon faulty climate models, stating: “We all know the
frailty  of  models  concerning  the  air-surface  system  .  .  .  We  only  need  to
watch the weather forecasts.”5

Another  prominent  scientist,  Syun-Ichi  Akasofu,  is  a  staunch  critic  of
certain parts of the United Nations’ IPCC 2007 AR4 report “Summary for
Policymakers.”  He  determined  that  IPCC  computer  models  could  not
duplicate observed temperature patterns in Arctic regions. Although the CO
forecasts  did  indicate  a  warm  Arctic  condition,  they  were  lower  than
actually  reported,  and  colder  areas  were  absent.  Dr.  Akasofu  stated,  “If
fourteen  GCMs  cannot  reproduce  prominent  warming  in  the  continental

2

Arctic, perhaps much of this warming is not produced by greenhouse effect
at all.”6

Spencer coauthored a report of a scientific study that was published in
Science  Daily  at  the  end  of  2007.  In  the  report  he  asserted  that  IPCC’s
computer models may be wildly overestimating man-made global warming
due to a lack of understanding of the important roles that clouds play: “All
leading climate models forecast that as the atmosphere warms there should
be  an  increase  in  high-altitude  cirrus  clouds,  which  would  amplify  any
warming caused by man-made GHGs . . . To give an idea how strong this
enhanced cooling mechanism is, if it was operating on global warming it
would reduce estimates of future warming by over 75 percent.”7

NASA’s GISS director, James Hansen, seems to have been well aware of
this  model  problem  when  his  organization,  along  with  MIT,  published  a
paper  in  the  February  28,  2001,  issue  of  the  Bulletin  of  the  American
Meteorological Society. The authors of that paper explained that the Pacific
Ocean “may be able to open a ‘vent’ in its heat-trapping cirrus cloud cover
and release enough energy into space to significantly diminish the projected
climate  warming  …  This  newly  discovered  effect—which  is  not  seen  in
current  prediction  models—could  significantly  reduce  estimates  of  future
climate warming.”8

Graeme  Stephens  of  Colorado  State  University’s  Department  of
Atmospheric  Science  warned  in  a  January  2005  paper,  published  in  the
Journal of Climate, that computer models involve simplistic cloud feedback
descriptions:  “Much  more  detail  on  the  system  and  its  assumptions  [is]
needed to judge the value of any study. Thus we are led to conclude that the
diagnostic  tools  currently  in  use  by  the  climate  community  to  study
feedback,  at  least  as  implemented,  are  problematic  and  immature  and
generally cannot be verified using observations.”9

A peer-reviewed climate study that appeared in the July 23, 2009, edition
of Geophysical Research is critical of IPCC modeling tendencies to fudge
climate projections by exaggerating CO
 influences and underestimating the
importance  of  shifts  in  ocean  conditions.  The  research  indicated  that
influences  of  solar  changes  and  intermittent  volcanic  activity  have
accounted for at least 80 percent of observed climate variation over the past
half century. Study coauthor John McLean made this observation:

2

When  climate  models  failed  to  retrospectively  produce  the
temperatures  since  1950, 
the  modelers  added  some  estimated
influences of carbon dioxide to make up the shortfall . . . The IPCC
acknowledges in its fourth Assessment Report that [El Niño-Southern
Oscillation]  ENSO  conditions  cannot  be  predicted  more  than  12
months ahead, so the output of climate models that could not predict
ENSO  conditions  were  being  compared  to  temperatures  during  a
period  that  was  dominated  by  those  influences.  It’s  no  wonder  that
model  outputs  have  been  so  inaccurate,  and  it’s  clear  that  future
modeling must incorporate the ENSO effect if it is to be meaningful.10

Even Kevin Trenberth, an exposed party in the University of East Anglia
CRU  “Climategate”  scandal,  has  admitted  that  the  IPCC  climate  models
failed to duplicate realities. In 2007 he stated, “None of the models used by
the IPCC are initialized to the observed state and none of the climate states
in the models correspond even remotely to the current observed climate.”11

Human CO

 Fingerprints and Footprints

2

 

One reason why anthropogenic influences upon global climate change
are extremely difficult to model is that there is no reliable way to separate
human  sources 
from  natural  ones.  More  generally,  atmospheric
measurement records are very short and exist against a background of other
natural  variables  that  have  other  unknown  effects.  For  example,  satellite
spectral analyses of North Atlantic oscillations reveal a randomly varying
climate  pattern  with  little  evidence  of  a  persistent  long-term  trend
influenced  by  man-made  CO
  contributions.  Models  have  been  shown  to
under-predict  natural  climate  variations  on  decade-long  to  century-long
timescales;  to  incorrectly  predict  variances  over  timescales  in  which
anthropogenic CO
 levels would be expected to rise; and to under-predict
changes  due  to  short-term  natural  influences.  Such  influences  include
volcanic eruptions, stratospheric ozone variations, sulfate aerosol changes,
and solar change events.

It is important to realize that global temperatures and atmospheric CO
levels  have  fluctuated  greatly  over  hundreds,  thousands,  and  millions  of
years,  long  before  humankind  lit  cave  fires  or  Icelandic  Vikings  tended

2

2

2

2

2

 levels—not the other way around.
 levels and temperatures bear this out.

cattle, sheep, and goats on previously warm Greenland grasslands. In most
cases,  the  temperature  changes  led,  rather  than  followed,  changes  in
atmospheric CO
Records of CO
During the 149 years between 1812 and 1961 there were three periods
when  average  CO
those  when
temperatures peaked in 2004. Circa 1820, they reached about 440 parts per
million (ppm). Around 1855, they were about 390 ppm, and they returned
to about 440 ppm in 1940 when man-made CO
 emissions were nearly 30
times higher than they were in 1880 (such emissions are even higher than
that now).12

  concentrations  were  higher 

than 

2

2

2

2

Based  upon  a  variety  of  proxy  indicators,  such  as  ice  core  samples,
atmospheric CO
 levels have remained relatively low over the past 650,000
years,  even  during  the  six  previous  interglacial  periods  when  global
temperatures  were  as  much  as  9ºF  warmer  than  the  temperatures  we
currently  enjoy.  If  this  is  true,  might  we  legitimately  wonder  what
accounted  for  those  nonhuman  greenhouse  influences?  It  would  seem  to
suggest  that  anthropogenic  CO
  contributions  may  have  no  discernible
influence upon climate, or that proxy data is often inaccurate—or both.

Maurine Raymo, an MIT associate professor of earth, atmospheric, and
planetary sciences, published a paper in the April 1988 issue of the journal
Nature,  suggesting  that  the  Earth  has  endured  huge  climate  swings  on  a
number  of  occasions  over  the  past  1.5  million  years.13  Records  from  ice
cores and ocean sediments show that atmospheric CO
 concentrations over
this period have fluctuated greatly throughout Earth’s history due to several
natural  causes.  Levels  of  CO
  rise  and  fall  seasonally  in  response  to
warming  and  cooling  effects  of  plant  growth  cycles.  GHGs  and  aerosols
emitted  from  volcanic  eruptions,  along  with  probable  Earth  orbit,  solar
changes, and other contributors, have combined heating and cooling effects.
In  turn,  these  forcing  factors  affect  ocean  temperatures,  which  influence
evaporation rates (rainfall and plant growth) and the amount of atmospheric
CO
  is  dissolved  at  ocean  surfaces,
particularly in polar regions where water is coldest. Aerobic respiration by
plants  and  animals  breaks  down  glucose  into  CO
  and  water,  while
photosynthesis  reverses  the  process.  Huge  deposits  of  limestone,  marble,
and  chalk,  mainly  composed  of  calcium  carbonate,  are  eroded  by  ocean

  absorbed  and  released.  More  CO

2

2

2

2

2

water  to  produce  CO
natural.14

2

  and  carbonic  acid.  Climate  change  is  thus  very

2

2

2

, or any CO

Looking  back  over  several  million  years  in  Earth’s  history,  it  is
challenging  to  imagine  that  major  global  temperature  swings  can  be
attributed to man-made CO
for that matter. It is apparent that
past CO
 levels have been high at times when global temperatures were low,
and vice versa. During the eras when dinosaurs thrived, global temperatures
ranged between 72ºF and 77ºF, a blistering 20 degrees higher than today’s
average  between  54ºF  and  57ºF.15  So  far  as  we  know,  none  of  those
creatures,  flatulent  as  they  may  have  been,  would  have  been  responsible.
And there is no evidence that they burned coal or drove SUVs.

Around 600 million years ago (during the Cambrian period of the Early
Paleozoic  era),  atmospheric  CO
  levels  were  believed  to  be  about  7,000
ppm,  compared  with  the  379  ppm  in  2005!16  Then,  approximately  480
million  years  ago  (between  the  Ordovician  and  Silurian  periods),  those
levels gradually dropped to 4,000 ppm over about 100 million years, while
average  temperatures  remained  at  a  steady  72ºF.  The  CO
  levels  later
jumped rapidly to 4,500 ppm during the Late Ordovician period, and guess
what!  Temperatures  dove  to  an  estimated  average  similar  to  today,  even
though the CO
 level was around twelve times higher than it is at present.
Yes, as CO

 went up, temperatures plummeted.

2

2

2

2

2

About 438 million years ago, atmospheric CO

 dropped from 4,500 ppm
to  3,000  ppm,  yet  according  to  fossil  records,  world  temperatures  shot
rapidly back up to an average 72ºF. So, regardless of whether the CO
 levels
were 7,000 ppm or 3,000 ppm, temperatures rose and fell independently.17

Also, over the past 600 million years there have been only three periods,
including now, when Earth’s average temperature has been as low as 54ºF.
One was the Late Ordovician period; the other occurred about 315 million
years  ago,  during  a  45-million-year-long  cool  spell  called  the  Late
Carboniferous period. Most of our planet’s coalfields date back to that time.
Both CO
 and temperatures shot back up at the end of it, just as the main
Mesozoic  dinosaur  era  was  beginning.  CO
  levels  rose  to  between  1,200
ppm and 1,800 ppm, and temperatures again returned to the average 72ºF
that Earth seemed to prefer.18

Around 180 million years ago, CO

 rocketed up from about 1,200 ppm to
2,500  ppm.  And  would  you  believe  it?  This  coincided  again  with  a  big

2

2

2

2

2

temperature dive from 72ºF to about 61ºF. Then, at the border between the
Jurassic period when T. rex ruled and the Cretaceous period that followed,
CO
 levels dropped again, while temperatures soared back to 72ºF. Average
temperatures  remained  at  that  high  level  until  long  after  the  dinosaurs
became extinct.19

Perhaps  you’ll  wish  to  ponder  this  question:  Given  that  over  most  of
Earth’s  known  climate  history,  the  atmospheric  CO
  levels  have  been
between  four  and  eighteen  times  higher  than  they  are  now—throughout
many  times  when  life  not  only  survived  but  also  flourished;  times  that
preceded  humans;  times  when  CO
  levels  and  temperatures  moved  in
different directions—how much difference will putting caps on emissions
accomplish? Consider also that about 97 percent of all current atmospheric
CO

 derives from natural sources.

2

2

2

Throwing the Public a Curve

 

2

2

2

The  IPCC’s  2007  AR4  report  “Summary  for  Policymakers”  asserted
that atmospheric GHGs (read as CO
) “now far exceed preindustrial values
over the past 650,000 years.” That report appears to reflect some short-term
memory deficiencies. It is not accurate, as the authors claim, that CO
 in the
preindustrial era was about 25 percent lower than it is now. As evidenced
by  the  more  than  ninety  thousand  direct  CO
  measurements  taken  in
America,  Asia,  and  Europe  between  1812  and  1961,  concentrations  have
been much higher than the approximate 380 ppm level we see today.20

With such weak evidence, how did organizations find a way to convince
the public that atmospheric CO
 levels are skyrocketing? As it turned out,
IPCC  representations  of  postindustrial  influences  on  climate  change  were
heavily  based  upon  a  very  misleading,  unpublished,  non-peer-reviewed
research  report  submitted  by  the  author.  A  now-infamous  “hockey  stick”
graph  that  illustrated  the  report’s  conclusions  has  since  been  thoroughly
debunked,  yet  it  was  repeatedly  highlighted  in  IPCC  summary  reports.  It
was also used as the main visual in the Clinton-Gore administration’s report
“National Assessment of the Potential Consequences of Climate Change”
(2000)  and  again  featured  in  Al  Gore’s  An  Inconvenient  Truth—both  the
movie and the book.

2

The graph’s creator was none other than Michael Mann, later exposed as
a  principal  inner-circle  member  of  the  Climategate  network  revealed
through hacked CRU e-mails. When Mann produced the graph, he was a
young  PhD  at  the  University  of  Massachusetts  and  the  IPCC  report  lead
author,  who  selected  his  own  non-peer-reviewed  paper  for  inclusion.
Arguably, this flawed study has done more to advance the concept of global
warming hype than all others combined.

Mann’s  research  produced  curves  representing  changes  in  atmospheric
CO
 levels over time frames ranging from 300 to 10,000 to 400,000 years.
All  showed  that  low  preindustrial  concentrations  soared  up  to  about  370
ppm at the end of the 20th century, obviously (it appeared) due to human
influences. Temperature change graphs superimposed over the CO
 curves
made that connection clear and dramatic.21

2

2

Mann’s  early  temperature  data  was  taken  from  several  different  proxy
records,  particularly  tree  rings.  More  recent  records  were  based  upon
official surface readings taken since 1980. They included some measured in
what are termed “urban heat islands” influenced by buildings, paving and
other  infrastructure  developments,  which  probably  inflated  the  warming
change.  He  eliminated  substantial  temperature  fluctuations  that  occurred
during the Medieval Warm Period (MWP; about 950 to 1300 AD) and the
Little  Ice  Age  (LIA;  1500s  to  1800s),  reinforcing  the  premise  that
temperatures were quite stable for approximately 900 years prior to 1910,
and then they rocketed upward. The results were impressive.22

Issues arose after two Canadian non–climate scientists trained in statistics
began to wonder if the chart wasn’t maybe too stunning. Steve McIntyre, a
metallurgy  and  data  analysis  expert,  and  Ross  McKitrick,  an  economist
from the University of Guelph, asked Mann for sources of the original data,
and after repeated requests, they finally obtained an incomplete response.
They learned that the Mann temperature proxy studies had given heaviest
weight  to  tree  ring  data  from  fourteen  Sierra  Nevada  mountain  sites  in
California  based  upon  ancient  slow-growing,  high-elevation  bristlecone
pine trees that wouldn’t have reflected a strong 20th-century growth spurt
attributable to warming as had been assumed. On the other hand, early high
CO
 levels could have been a fertilizing growth factor, since the trees can
live 5,000 years. After eliminating the problematic tree data and repeatedly
recalculating, the distinctive hockey stick shape flattened.

2

McKitrick commented on this circumstance regarding issues of corporate
transparency:  “The  failure  of  the  IPCC  to  carry  out  …  independent
verification  or  to  audit  studies  may  be  partly  explained  by  the  lack  of
independence  between  the  chapter  authors  and  the  original  authors.
Professor Mann was lead author of the chapter relying on his own findings,
a  lack  of  independence  that  would  never  be  tolerated  in  ordinary  public
offering of securities.”23

Russia: A New Cold War

 

A  report  titled  “How  Warming  Is  Being  Made:  The  Case  of  Russia”
alleges that the CRU and England’s Hadley Centre for Climate Change, the
UK’s  two  top  climate  research  organizations,  have  improperly  selected
Russian climate data to bolster warming claims. Issued by the Institute of
Economic Analysis (IEA), an independent Moscow-based group, the report
shows that the Russian data used for analyses came from just 25 percent of
the  country’s  meteorological  stations  and  omitted  about  40  percent  of  its
landmass.  Those  chosen  stations  tended  to  be  closer  to  large  population
centers, which tend to be warmer.

According  to  the  IEA’s  president,  Andrei  Illarionov,  “The  IEA  report
concludes that it is necessary to recalculate all global temperature data in
order to assess the real rate of temperature change during the last century.
Global temperature data will have to be modified because the calculations
used  at  Copenhagen  by  the  United  Nations  Climate  Change  Conference
analysts are based upon Hadley-CRU research.”24

McIntyre  notes  that  a  March  2004  CRU  e-mail  tends  to  confirm  an
intentional suppression of Russia’s Siberian climate records that has been
suspected  for  some  time.  A  communication  from  CRU’s  director,  Phil
Jones, to Mann states, “Recently rejected two papers (one for JGR and [one
for] for GRL) from people saying CRU has it wrong for Siberia. Went to
town  in  both  reviews,  hopefully  successfully.  If  either  appears  [in  the
journals] I will be very surprised, but you never know with GRL.”25 (JRL
refers to the Journal of Geophysical Research, and GRL to the Geophysical
Research Letters.)

In  response  to  this  charge  of  data  manipulation,  the  United  Nations’
World  Meteorological  Organization  (WMO;  aka  Met  Office)  offered  a

denial, stating in part, “These [Russian stations] are distributed around the
globe and provide a fair representation of changes in global temperatures
over land. We do not choose these stations and therefore it is impossible for
the Met Office to fix the data.” Dave Britton, spokesman for the Met Office,
stated that while it would publish station data as soon as it could, this may
take a while because that data came from climate centers in many countries,
some of which may not be willing to give up their intellectual property.26

Intellectual property? Is climate change a proprietary investment?

Confused Carbon Conceptions

 

Popular  conceptions  about  anthropogenic  CO

  contributions  to  global
warming  promulgated  by  the  IPCC  for  media  dissemination  are  very
misleading, for several reasons.

2

1.  The actual amount attributable to human sources is extremely tiny
relative  to  the  atmospheric  total,  with  incalculably  small  net
greenhouse influences.

2.    History  shows  that  those  miniscule  amounts  have  fluctuated
between  much  higher  and  lower  relative  concentrations  than  now,
long before industrial societies existed and yet when life on Earth
flourished.

3.  These fluctuations generally followed, rather than preceded, global
temperature  changes,  often  by  hundreds  and  even  thousands  of
years.

4.  No one can say just how warm is “normal,” although interglacial
periods,  such  as  our  present  one,  are  certainly  abnormally  more
wonderful than glacial periods that last about ten times longer.

5.  There is absolutely no evidence to support catastrophic scenarios
projected by those who simultaneously ignore predictable warming
benefits.

Al Gore’s description of GHGs in both his movie and his book titled An
Inconvenient Truth  refers  to  these  gasses  producing  a  “thickening”  of  the
atmosphere.  This  gives  the  impression  that  human  activities  are  really
  that  are  enveloping  the
filling  up  the  air  with  copious  quantities  of  CO

2

planet  in  a  dense,  heavy  insulating  blanket  of  massive  proportions.  A
realistic image is very different.

.  The  vast  majority—about  368—of  these  CO

For every 1 million molecules in the atmosphere, only about 380 of these
are CO
molecules are from
natural land and sea sources, while only about 12 are believed to come from
human activities, which include fossil-fuel burning and cement industries.

2

2

2

2

It is estimated that atmospheric CO

 has been growing at a rate of about
0.4  percent  per  year  since  1974.  Let’s  assume,  for  example,  that  all  this
increase  is  attributed  to  humans.  Now  imagine  that  instead  of  CO
molecules, we are thinking of a medium-size city with a population of about
a hundred thousand people. At this rate, it would require about 5 years to
add  one  new  person.  That  is  how  much  the  city’s  urban  density  would
“thicken.”

Of  all  GHGs,  water  vapor  comprises  about  70  percent  of  the  total  by
 constitutes somewhere between 4.2 and 8.4 percent. If
volume, while CO
we  assume  that  humans  are  responsible  for  about  0.12  percent  of  the
greenhouse  effect,  that  would  probably  amount  to  less  than  0.02ºF  of
warming  over  the  past  hundred  years.  That  includes  all  CO
  emission
sources.  On  a  molecular  basis,  methane,  another  GHG,  is  about  twenty-
three times more efficient at producing atmospheric warming than is CO
; it
is also accumulating in the atmosphere more rapidly.
A common misconception is that all or most CO

 emissions from human
activities  accumulate  steadily  in  the  atmosphere  with  a  proportional
greenhouse effect. Yet, on average, the surface environment absorbs about
half of those CO
 increase generally
produces half the warming effect of the preceding one, and the atmosphere
can become saturated to stop further effects.

 emissions. In addition, each unit of CO

2

2

2

2

2

2

Discerning Influences

 

The  IPCC’s  Second  Assessment  Report,  “Climate  Change  1995,”
asserts that “the balance of evidence suggests a discernible human influence
[on warming],” but it doesn’t really explain which human influence(s) are
discernible.  We  are  left  to  assume  it  is  referring  to  GHG  emissions
(primarily CO
) due to the attention directed toward them, along with some
mention  of  deforestation.  Development  of  cities,  growth  of  agriculture,

2

2

2

2

construction  of  highways,  and  other  possible  influences  are  difficult  to
model. The main suspect, of course, is CO

.

About 80 percent of the recorded atmospheric CO

 rise during the 20th
century that has been attributed to greenhouse warming occurred after  an
initial major rise in global surface temperatures. Temperature increases in
the Northern Hemisphere since the 1970s have occurred mostly during cold
seasons.  Most  of  the  current  warming  occurred  before  1940  and  declined
afterward, until the 1970s, despite a large surge of CO
 during that cooling
period. The Earth has warmed only slightly since the 1940s.

Historical surface measurements, along with “proxy” evidence obtained
from  mountain  glaciers,  tree-growth  rings,  ocean  coral  layers,  and  other
biological  indicators,  suggest  that  global  average  temperatures  had  risen
about 0.9ºF during the early part of the 20th century, before most GHGs had
been  added  to  the  air  by  human  activities.  The  temperatures  peaked  by
around 1940 and then cooled until the 1970s. Since that time, little or no
surface temperature increases have been observed.27

On  the  other  hand,  about  80  percent  of  the  atmospheric  CO

  increases
(those that might be attributed to human sources), entered the air after 1940,
a  time  when  temperatures  were  either  cooling  (prior  to  the  1970s)  or
increasing  very  little  (after  this  period).  If  this  is  accurate,  anthropogenic
contributions since the 1970s would be only about 0.18ºF.

But  what  if  atmospheric  CO

  levels  continue  to  rise,  and  perhaps  even
double the present level of about 380 ppm? Some models predict that they
might, which has led to concerns about disastrous temperature levels in the
future. Typical GCM estimates predict that such a doubling might produce
an  increase  in  the  range  of  2.7ºF  to  8.1ºF,  but  with  very  high  levels  of
uncertainty subject to large errors. These numbers are not at all consistent
with  observed  CO
  doubling  effects  from  natural  causes.  For  example,
influences  of  volcanic  eruptions  suggest  a  “sensitivity  “  (impact)  of  only
0.54ºF  to  0.9ºF  for  a  doubling,  and  a  variety  of  biological  and  other
feedback yields a sensitivity of about 0.72ºF if doubled.28

The  IPCC’s  Third  Assessment  Report,  “Climate  Change  2001,”
acknowledged  that  climate  is  naturally  variable,  and  human  influences
couldn’t be conclusively pinpointed or quantified: “The fact that the global
mean temperature has increased since the late 19th century and that other
trends have been observed does not necessarily mean that an anthropogenic

2

2

2

effect on the climate has been identified. Climate has always varied on all
timescales, so the observed change may be natural.”29

Yet the report still went on to blame people for recent warming in even
stronger terms than before: “There is new and stronger evidence that most
of the warming that occurred over the last 50 years is attributable to human
activities . . . In light of new evidence and taking into account the remaining
uncertainties, most of the observed warming over the past 50 years is likely
to have been due to the increase in greenhouse gas concentrations.”

The selection of “the last 50 years” as a benchmark is interesting because
the  IPCC  report  then  deleted  temperature  records  from  weather  balloons
(past 41 years) and satellites (past 21 years) that did not reveal substantial
warming.  In  addition,  about  half  of  that  period  (from  1950  to  1975)
recorded cooling, not warming. Records also show that areas of Greenland
have  become  colder  during  the  last  half  century,  particularly  in  the
southwestern  coastal  region,  as  have  surface  temperatures  in  the  nearby
Labrador Sea. This information is based upon studies conducted by Edward
Hanna at Britain’s University of Plymouth and John Capellan of the Danish
Meteorological  Institute,  using  data  obtained  at  eight  Greenland  weather
station sites and three stations recording sea surface temperatures.30

The  IPCC’s  Fourth  Assessment  Report,  “Climate  Change  2007,”
specifically asserts that global temperatures during the past 50 years are the
warmest  in  the  past  1,300  years  due  to  fossil  burning,  although  neither
statement  can  be  proven.  The  Medieval  Warm  Period,  which  was  well
documented in earlier IPCC summaries but disappeared in the hockey stick
graph, was warmer than the 20th century, when temperatures peaked about
1940 and changed little from the 1990s on. Again, about 80 percent of that
20th-century increase occurred before the end of that 1940 peak.

If humans are responsible for warming (or cooling) changes during the
20th century, then who or what caused similar changes before we allegedly
messed up the climate balance before that time? And why do temperatures
continue to periodically fluctuate downward at times when our greenhouse
contributions  should  theoretically  cause  steady  increases—as  the  IPCC’s
own  report  “Climate  Change  1990”  observed?  According  to  that  report,
“The  upper  troposphere  shows  there  has  been  a  rather  steady  decline  in
temperatures since the late 1950s and early 1960s in general disagreement
with  model  simulations  that  show  warming  at  those  levels  when  the
concentrations of GHGs is increased.”31

Changing Climate: From What to What?

 

Satellites  can  now  provide  new  information  about  the  dynamics  of
weather  systems,  global  atmospheric  and  surface  temperature  changes,
atmospheric  composition,  cloud  and  rainfall  patterns,  sea  and  ice  level
measurements, and other data that wasn’t available a few decades ago. One
of  the  numerous  reasons  this  is  important  is  that  to  understand  climate
change,  we  must  know  what  benchmarks  it  is  changing  from.  This  is  a
fundamental problem because before the advent of satellites (i.e., prior to
1979),  which  observe  the  entire  Earth  and  its  atmosphere,  all  we  have  to
compare changes to are surface recordings at scattered sites that used now-
antiquated instruments and methods. In addition, some later developments
at  many  of  those  sites  have  produced  localized  heat  island  pockets  of
warming  effects  that  have  been  inflated  and  projected  onto  regional  and
global scales.

We still don’t really know how cool (or warm) it was at the beginning of
the  last  century.  Early  temperatures  were  recorded  using  liquid-in-glass
thermometers that were both difficult to calibrate and read and unreliable
due to glass shrinkage. Most measurements were conducted in the Northern
Hemisphere,  typically  in  or  near  small  towns,  often  with  thermometers
placed  in  direct  sunlight  or  on  walls  of  buildings  that  blocked,  absorbed,
and/or reflected radiation. Not all were continually monitored or recorded at
the same time of day. Over time, large buildings were constructed next to
many  of  these  thermometers  and  cities  grew  up  around  them.  Weather
stations  were  developed—often  located  at  airports  where  aircraft  engines
contributed heat.32

NOAA  operates  a  surface  network  of  1,221  temperature  monitoring
stations  across  the  US.  So  we  might  assume  that  the  government  has  a
pretty  good  handle  on  temperature  changes,  right?  Maybe  not.  Anthony
Watts, a former TV meteorologist who distrusted the data, organized a large
volunteer  effort  to  visit  most  of  those  stations  and  photographically
document compliance with official installation standards. Direct surveys of
1,003  of 
that  only  11  percent  met  basic
requirements.33

those  stations  revealed 

From  early  times  until  today,  many  regions—remote  polar  regions  in
particular—have had spotty surface temperature monitoring. Measurements
of sea temperatures are recorded at floating buoys and on board cooperating

ships. The ship measurements rarely occur at the same locations and often
employ nonstandard procedures, sometimes using buckets or engine intake
water, which is obtained from levels lower than the buoys. US compilers of
global temperatures don’t recognize ship measurements as being acceptably
reliable.

How much exactly has the Earth warmed during the past hundred years
or  so?  Nobody  really  knows  for  sure  because  nobody  knows  what  the
temperature was before satellites entered the scene.

And as far as the future is concerned, scientists know virtually nothing
about  that  either.  Global  climate  forecast  models  are  really  nothing  more
than  informed,  but  highly  speculative,  guesses  produced  by  untested
methods,  which  are  easily  manipulated  to  comply  with  preconceived
expectations.  Even  in  regard  to  local  weather  predictions,  the  ability  to
really forecast beyond about 10 days is unrealistic. This is because of what
is known as a “butterfly effect,” in which very small events, analogous to
the flutter of a butterfly’s wings, mix together with compounding complex
influences  that  become  manifested  a  few  days  or  weeks  later  in
unpredictable ways.34 Climate models are no different, and they have never
demonstrated an ability to predict changes even 10 years ahead, much less
100 years or more.35

Setting the Thermostat: How Cool Do We Want It?

 

Former NASA administrator Michael Griffin got in hot water with some
“environmentalists” for remarks he made in May 2007. During an interview
broadcast on National Public Radio’s Morning Edition, he commented:

I  have  no  doubt  that  global—that  a  trend  of  global  warming
exists . . . I’m not sure it’s fair to say that it is a problem to wrestle
with … to assume that is a problem is to assume that the state of the
Earth’s climate today is the optimal climate, the best climate that we
could have or ever have had, and that we need to take steps to make
sure  it  doesn’t  change  .  .  .  First  of  all,  I  don’t  think  it’s  within  the
power of human beings to assume that the climate does not change, as
millions of years of history have shown. Second, I guess I would ask
which  human  beings—where  or  when—are  to  be  accorded  the

privilege  of  deciding  that  this  particular  climate  that  we  might  have
right here today is the best climate for all other human beings. I think
that’s a rather arrogant position for people to take.36

Mr.  Griffin’s  remarks  were  taken  by  some  to  suggest  that  NASA  was
backsliding  on  its  roles  in  collecting  and  analyzing  satellite  climate  data.
Philip Clapp, president of the National Environmental Trust, a nonpartisan
watchdog  group,  thought  that  the  comments  conflicted  with  his  own
organization’s science findings. “The science performed by NASA, as well
as scientists around the world, shows that global warming is no longer an
environmental  issue.  It’s  a  rapidly  advancing  disaster.  Millions  of  people
across the world will face hunger, flooding from a rise in sea levels, and
water scarcity. To try to hide that by saying we don’t know what the climate
should be is ignoring the science of his own agency.”37

So NASA appears to have a new mandate: Verify that there definitely is a
climate crisis based upon doomsday scenarios projected by your employee,
James  Hansen,  and  other  alarmists,  regardless  of  what  the  actual  data
shows. Forget about large temperature shifts that predated modern human
history, and assume we are responsible. After all, what else do we pay you
for?

It’s Official Now: No More Global Warming

 

The  term  “global  warming”  has  now  been  replaced  in  sophisticated
circles  with  the  more  PC,  acceptable  term  “climate  change.”  Since  the
distinctions  tend  to  be  somewhat  confusing,  please  accept  the  following
clarification as a public education service for those discriminating readers
who actually care to be up to date on such matters.

To begin this short tutorial, global warming—as commonly used by Al
Gore  and  in  the  press—is  a  euphemism  for  unnatural  (man-made)  and
dangerous heating of the Earth that human beings are causing through CO
emissions  we  release  into  the  atmosphere.  It  does  not  generally  refer  to
natural warming periods that have been interspersed with cooling and very
cold  events  throughout  billions  of  years.  It  also  doesn’t  refer  to  those
natural changes plus any additional, yet unknown, influences humans have
contributed. You probably already knew that.

2

So what exactly does “climate change” mean? Perhaps we can find out

by referring to an official definition cooked up by the UN and its IPCC.

2

Article  1  of  the  United  Nations’  Framework  Commission  on  Climate
Change (FCCC) makes it clear that the organization’s definition of the term
is about human, not natural, causes. Here, climate change is a “change of
climate which is attributed directly or indirectly to human activity that alters
the composition of the global atmosphere and which is in addition to natural
climate variability observed over comparable time periods.”

In any case, if some of you haven’t followed all this, you needn’t worry
too  much.  What  it  all  comes  down  to  is  that  humans  are  causing  global
warming,  climate  change,  and  lots  of  variability  through  our  “unnatural
acts.”

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  our  ancestors  and  we  ourselves  have
affected our planet and its ecosystems in many ways that are not entirely for
its  good.  Examples  of  those  ways  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,
deforestation,  and  soil  erosion  caused  by  improper  land  management;
atmospheric  particulates,  sulfates,  and  other  pollutants  produced  from
industry and vehicle exhaust; and the release of toxic wastes into soils and
water. There is, however, no clear scientific evidence that atmospheric CO
resulting from human activities has produced or will produce dangerously
deleterious effects upon global climate or temperatures. Meaningful impact
projections  using  current  climate  models  are  not  yet  possible.  Forecast
methods that attempt to include all suspected influences over exceedingly
short-term  (much  less  inter-annual,  decadal,  and  centennial)  timescales
produce only highly speculative guesses.38

Chapter 3

FORCING FACTORS AND FICTIONS

 

Hot
1 

2 

3 

4 

that 

the
blocks

  Active  sunspot  periods
produce  high  solar  wind
pressures.
  Solar  winds  create 
heliosphere 
cosmic rays from space.
  Some  cosmic  rays  are
blocked  by 
the  Earth’s
magnetosphere.
  Solar 
through 
producing warming.

radiation  passes
the 
atmosphere,

Not
1 

low  sunspot
  Periods  of 
activity  reduce  solar  wind
pressures.

2  More cosmic rays from deep
the

enter 

space 
magnetosphere.

3    The  magnetosphere  blocks
some,  but  not  all,  cosmic
rays.
the
  Cosmic 
atmosphere,  creating  clouds
that reflect radiation.

rays  enter 

4 

 

There is certainly nothing new about cyclical, often abrupt climate
changes,  most  particularly  those  that  occur  during  relatively  brief
interglacial periods, such as the one we currently have the great fortune to
enjoy. To appreciate just how lucky we are to live in the present, consider
climate  cycles  from  a  big-picture  historical  perspective.  Over  the  past
400,000 years, much of the Northern Hemisphere has been covered by ice,
up to 3 miles thick, at regular intervals lasting about 100,000 years each.
Much  shorter  interglacial  cycles,  like  our  current  one,  lasting  anywhere
from  12,000  to  18,000  years,  have  offered  reprieves  from  the  bitter  cold.
From  this  perspective,  there  can  be  no  question  that  current  temperatures
are indeed abnormally warm.

The average temperature of our planet has been gradually increasing on a
fairly constant basis over the past 18,000 years or so since it began thawing
out  of  the  last  Ice  Age.  By  about  12,000  to  15,000  years  ago,  Earth  had
warmed enough to halt the advance of the glaciers and cause sea levels to
rise. About 8,000 years ago, an ice bridge across the Bering Strait became
submerged, cutting off migrations of people and animals to North America.1
A short review of recent history (at least according to Earth’s large-scale
calendar)  may  provide  some  perspective.  Let’s  start  with  a  period  from
about 750 BC to 200 BC, before the founding of Rome, when temperatures
had  dropped  from  a  previously  warmer  time.  A  resulting  cooler,  drier
climate caused river and lake levels to drop in Egypt and Central Africa.
The Tiber River froze, and snow remained on the ground for long periods
almost  unimaginable  now.  European  glaciers  advanced,  and  water  that
became  trapped  in  them  and  other  ice  sheets  caused  sea  levels  to  drop
somewhat also.2

Then the climate warmed up again. Grapes were first reported in Rome
about 150 BC, and soon grapes and olives were being cultivated in large
abundance  further  north  in  Italy  than  would  have  been  possible  during
earlier  centuries.  By  about  350  AD,  the  climate  became  milder  in  the
northern regions, and tropical regions became much wetter. Heavy rains in
Africa caused high-level Nile floods, and Central America and the tropical
Yucatan experienced similar conditions. By the late 4th century, the climate
may have been warmer than it is now.

As  the  glaciers  continued  to  melt,  the  sea  may  have  risen  slightly,
possibly  3  feet  or  less,  evidenced  by  the  remains  of  ancient  harbors  in
Naples and the Adriatic that are now about that depth below water. North
Africa  (now  Tunisia,  Algeria,  and  Morocco)  was  moist  enough  to  grow
grain,  and  the  area  experienced  a  large  population  expansion.  But  those
good times were to end for a while. By around the 9th century, conditions
began to cool again, and ice formed once more on the Nile.3

But  then,  guess  what!  At  about  the  beginning  of  the  10th  century,  it
began to become warmer. A decline in high winds and fierce storms favored
more shipping, and trade fairs began to occur in about 1000 AD. The Norse
colonized Greenland and caught codfish and seals in ice-free seas.

Conditions  during  this  MWP,  also  referred  to  as  the  Medieval  Climate
Optimum, witnessed an estimated 50 percent population growth in Europe
(about 5.5 million by 1300 AD), evidence that year-round food crops were
abundant.  Mountain  passes  stayed  open  longer  during  summers,  enabling
luxury goods—such as spices from Oriental caravans, sugar from Cyprus,
and Venetian glass—to be traded for English wools and Scandinavian furs.
The warm times were good times. Thousands of temples were constructed
in  Southeast  Asia,  including  Angkor  Wat,  which  suggests  very  favorable
weather for agriculture and labor.

Consider  that  as  recently  as  1,000  years  ago  Icelandic  Vikings  on
Greenland’s  southwestern  coast  were  raising  cattle,  sheep,  and  goats  in
grasslands. Then, around 1200, temperatures in Greenland began to drop,
and the settlements were abandoned by approximately 1350. Atlantic pack
ice  began  to  grow  around  1250,  and  shortened  growing  seasons  and
unreliable weather patterns, including torrential rains in Northern Europe,
led to the Great Famine of 1315–1317.4

Beginning about 1300, weather became unstable and unpredictable, with
warm  and  dry  summers  in  some  years,  cold  and  wet  summers  in  others.
Storms and high winds increased in the North Sea and the English Channel,
making the shipping industry hazardous. Grain failures occurred throughout
Europe  in  1315,  and  catastrophic  rains  affected  huge  areas,  ranging  from
Ireland to Germany and north into Scandinavia.5

Then,  starting  around  the  year  1550,  climate  shifts  began  to  turn
increasingly dreadful, and between the years 1690 and 1700, food shortages
claimed millions of lives. Hubert Lamb, founder of the Climate Research
Unit at the University of East Anglia, described the shift this way: “In the

middle of the 16th century, remarkably sharp changes occurred. And over
the  next  150  years  or  more,  the  evidence  points  to  the  coldest  regime—
though accompanied by notably great variations from year to year and from
one group of a few years to the next—at any time since the last major Ice
Age ended 10,000 years or so ago.”6

Although temperatures have been generally mild over the past 500 years,
we  should  remember  that  significant  fluctuations  are  normal.  Remember,
the  Little  Ice  Age  brought  frigid  weather  to  the  Northern  Hemisphere
between  the  16th  and  19th  centuries,  when  Alpine  glaciers  advanced  to
gradually  engulf  farms  and  villages  by  the  mid-17th  century  (the  LIA
mentioned  in  chapter  2).  The  Thames  River  and  New  York  Harbor  froze
over  by  1780,  and  sea  ice  closed  shipping  harbors  in  Iceland,  where  an
estimated one-third of the population perished.

Some widely publicized reports ignore or minimize mention of the MWP
and  LIA,  dismissing  them  as  rather  erratic  regional,  rather  than  global,
phenomena. They are wrong to do so. The first of these was clearly global,
and the second was hemispheric, if not worldwide.7

The current CO

 increases we have witnessed most dramatically during
the first half of the 20th century have followed a 300-year warming trend,
during which surface temperatures have been recovering from chills of the
LIA.  History  shows  us  that  lagging  atmospheric  CO
  increases  can  be
expected due to natural releases of gases from oceans as the temperatures
have risen.8

2

2

The past century witnessed two distinct periods of global warming. The
first occurred between 1900 and 1945, and the second, following a slight
cool-down, began quite abruptly in 1975. That second period rose at quite a
constant  rate  until  1998,  and  then  stopped  and  began  falling  again  after
reaching a high of 1.16ºF above the average mean. Between 2001 and 2008,
the temperature anomaly declined, averaging out at 0.86ºF above the mean.
Although this represents only a short change over a long period of warming,
global anomalies had risen steadily from around 1.10ºF below the mean in
1910. While still not enough to prove a trend, it does tend to throw cold
water  on  notions  of  a  climate  catastrophe  in  progress.  About  half  of  all
estimated  warming  since  1900  occurred  before  the  mid-1940s  despite
continuously rising CO

 levels.

As  Donald  Easterbrook,  a  geology  professor  of  Western  Washington
University, has observed, “Two cycles of global warming and two cycles of

2

global cooling have occurred during the past century, and no matter what
the causes, we cannot escape the conclusion that the Earth is in for global
cooling in the next two to three decades.”9

None other than East Anglia CRU director Phil Jones has admitted that
there  has  been  no  statistically  significant  warming  trend  for  at  least  15
years. He has also admitted that temperatures during the Middle Ages may
have been higher than they are today.10

The Uncertain Nature of Climate

 

As we all must recognize, it is impossible to reliably forecast weather
events over days and weeks, much less accurately predict climate changes
and causes typically measured over multiple decades. Climate forcings are
too  poorly  understood,  the  variables  too  numerous,  and  their  interactions
too dynamic and complex, for confident modeling. But given the fact that
Earth’s  climate  has  been  fluctuating  long  before  mankind  discovered  the
benefits of harnessing fire, it is logical to assume that many influences—
and  clearly 
the  most  dominant  ones—involve  naturally  occurring,
sometimes cyclical, events.11

Key among these natural climate forcings are believed to be changes in
the  Earth’s  orbital  eccentricity  around  the  Sun,  along  with  its  slow  axial
“wobble” over many thousands of years, called Milankovitch cycles. These
conditions influence the amount of sunlight received on the surface of the
Earth,  and  they  seem  to  correspond  with  glacial  and  interglacial  cycles.
Short  fluctuations  within  interglacial  periods  appear  to  be  linked  to  other
influences.  They  include  periodic,  cyclical  variations  in  solar  outputs;
natural  changes  in  ocean  currents;  seasonal  effects  of  cloud  cover,
precipitation,  and  vegetation  growth;  and  occasional  volcanic  eruptions
producing warming GHGs, along with dust and aerosols that block sunlight
to cause cooling.

Variations  in  Earth’s  orbital  path  around  the  Sun  occur  in  21,000-year
cycles as gravitational influences of other planets, the Moon, and the Sun
pull Earth closer or farther away from the Sun. Variations in the direction of
Earth’s axis (the wobble) occur in roughly 26,000-year cycles. Variations in
Earth’s  axial  tilt  between  22.1  degrees  and  24.5  degrees  (currently  23.44
degrees) occur in 41,000-year cycles.

Earth’s orbital path and axial tilt cycles affect climate patterns in the two
hemispheres  significantly.  Current  Southern  Hemisphere  summers  and
winters  are  more  extreme  than  in  the  Northern  Hemisphere  due  to  a  6.8
percent  differential  solar  exposure.  Also,  the  Earth  is  closest  to  the  Sun
during  southern  summer  and  farthest  away  during  southern  winter.
Gradually,  Northern  Hemisphere  winters  will  become  slightly  warmer  as
Earth becomes closer to the Sun during northern winter—southern summer.
About  7,000  years  ago,  when  Earth’s  axis  was  24.14  degrees,  the  Sahara
Desert was a very different place, with lakes, rivers, grasslands, and patches
of jungle. Then, over a 3,400-year period, it became gradually transformed
into what we find today. Better times will eventually return, since massive
amounts of water remain trapped underground.12

Many  scientists  believe  that  Pacific  Decadal  Oscillation  (PDO)  and
Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) ocean cycles associated with El
Niño and La Niña conditions, in combination with solar activity variances,
have had important climate influences during the past century. These factors
may account for much of the observed warming trends of the period from
1910 through the 1930s, cooling from the 1940s to the 1970s, and warming
during the decade between 1980 and 1990. Solar activity cycles of about 11
years and 200 years may modulate the effects of galactic cosmic ray (GCR)
magnetic fields, producing changes in cloud cover with both warming and
cooling results.

Much  scientific  attention  is  recently  being  directed  to  correlations
between periodic changes in sunspot activity and climate change. Reasons
for periodic changes that occur in the Sun’s behavior, when they will occur,
and  their  influences  upon  Earth’s  climate  are  not  well  understood,  and
current climate models cannot predict these factors. However, scientists are
beginning to discern certain trends.

As first recognized in the 1800s, solar activity typically runs in roughly
11-year cycles, often varying between 9 and 14 years long. But sometimes
periods of very low sunspot activity can stretch out for decades. During the
17th  century,  for  instance,  a  70-year-long  period  of  little  or  no  activity,
known as the Maunder Minimum, corresponded closely with the LIA that
extended  into  the  19th  century.  George  Washington’s  famous  winter  at
Valley Forge was associated with this LIA, as was Napoleon’s bitter retreat
from Moscow.13

Sunspot activity correlates with the strength of the solar wind, a plasma
stream of charged particles from the Sun’s upper atmosphere that interacts
with all planets in our Solar System and defines the envelope border with
interstellar space, called the “heliosphere.” This border is a location where
the  wind’s  strength  becomes  insufficient  to  push  back  the  wind  of  other
stars—the boundary of the “heliopause,” a shield of intersteller material that
wards  off  a  significant  portion  of  cosmic  rays  originating  from  the
surrounding  galaxy.  As  our  Sun’s  solar  wind  activity  decreases,  the
heliosphere diminishes in strength, allowing more galactic cosmic rays to
enter  the  inner  part  of  our  Solar  System.  Many  scientists  believe  those
penetrating cosmic rays cause atmospheric water vapor molecules to cluster
into droplets, forming low-level clouds that produce cooling when sunspot
activity is low.

Times  of  high  solar  activity  appear  to  correspond  with  eight  warming
periods noted during the past 12,000 years, including the Medieval Warm
Period and much of the recently past 20th century. It appears that the Sun’s
mood swings may be very consequential.14

Although the IPCC’s 2007 AR4 report claimed that solar influence upon
climate  is  “negligible,”  conclusions  of  a  scientific  study  published  in  the
journal Physics Today strongly take issue with that assessment. The authors,
Nicola Scafetta and Bruce West, reviewed recorded data that the IPCC and
many other climatologists had ignored as just “background noise,” and they
found  that  the  “noise”  perfectly  matched  solar  activity  over  at  least  4
centuries.  They  also  found  that  the  computer  modeling  by  the  IPCC  and
others was not producing accurate information because key solar flare and
other activity data had not been entered. The study concluded the following:
“If  climate  is  sensitive  to  solar  changes  as  the  …  findings  suggest,  the
current  anthropogenic  contribution  to  global  warming  is  significantly
overestimated. We estimate that the Sun could account for as much as 69
percent of the increase in Earth’s average temperature. Furthermore, if the
Sun does cool off, as some solar forecasts predict will happen over the next
few  decades,  that  cooling  could  stabilize  Earth’s  climate  and  avoid
catastrophic consequences predicted in the IPCC report.”15

The  study  of  the  Sun’s  activity  leads  some  to  anticipate  colder,  not
warmer,  temperatures  in  the  future.  Richard  Mewald  of  Caltech  observes
that  “In  2009,  cosmic  ray  intensities  have  increased  19  percent  beyond
anything that we’ve seen in the past 50 years.”16

Based  upon  current  solar  data,  the  Russian  Pulkovo  Observatory  space
research  laboratory  concludes  that  Earth  has  passed  its  latest  warming
cycle, and staff there predict that a fairly cold period will set in by 2012.
Temperatures may drop much lower by 2041 and remain very cold for 50 to
60 years, or longer.17

Kenneth Tapping at Canada’s National Research Council thinks we may
be  in  for  an  even  longer  cold  spell.  He  predicts  that  the  Sun’s  unusually
quiet current 11-year cycle might signal the beginning of a new Maunder
Minimum cold period, which occurs every couple of centuries and can last
a century or more.18

Solar activity peaked at the end of the 1990s, broke with a brief blip in
2002,  and  then  slumped  to  almost  none.  This  coincides  with  observed
cooling,  since  1999,  which  may  well  be  continuing.  There  were  only  six
sunspots during the entire year of 2008, the lowest number in 95 years. Yet
as recently as 2006, NASA predicted that the upcoming solar cycle would
be “a biggie.”19

Scientists agree that the Sun’s output is not constant, although it would
have been considered heresy a couple of centuries ago to suggest this. The
Sun has actually brightened about 30 percent during Earth’s history, while
interestingly  and  curiously  enough,  the  Earth’s  average  temperature  has
remained relatively constant.20 The Sun may have been about 0.25 percent
dimmer  during  the  Maunder  Minimum  and  other  similar  low-activity
periods. A solar radiative energy reduction of about 0.1 percent measured
against  an  average  “solar  constant,”  or  watts  of  solar  energy  per  square
meter as a baseline measurement (about 1,367 W/m2 at Earth’s surface), has
been observed to occur during fairly regular 11-year solar cycles.21

Solar minimum periods recorded over several decades since at least 1500
AD show positive correlations between times of greatest solar intensity and
sunspot  activity.  In  fact,  these  connections  appear  to  be  strong  enough  to
enable  sunspot  frequencies  to  be  used  as  a  proxy  for  levels  of  solar
brightness (or “irradiance”). Variations recorded by satellite measurements
also  demonstrate  correlations  between  the  solar  cycles  and  weather
influences. These observations contradict current climate models that have
ignored  solar  influences  thought  to  be  too  small  to  account  for  climate
changes.

Some  recent  data  indicates  that  variations  in  solar  irradiance,  spectral
irradiance  in  particular,  may  be  much  more  important  than  previously

assumed. When focusing attention upon those short radiation wavelengths
in  the  ultraviolet  (UV)  and  extreme  ultraviolet  (EUV)  thermal  bands,  the
levels vary during 11-year cycles by more than ten times.22

Satellite  data  analyses  conducted  by  Robert  Lee  at  NASA’s  Langley
Research  Center  have  compared  thermal  radiation  and  solar-irradiance
measurements from 1979 to 1989, which captured part of an 11-year solar
cycle. During that period a 0.54ºF–1.08ºF cooling was recorded from 1979
to 1985, followed by a 0.36ºF–0.54ºF warming to 1989. The observations
concluded  that  if  solar  forcing  was  the  only  cause  of  these  temperature
variations,  the  effects  are  five  times  greater  than  climate  models  predict.
However,  that  larger  response  may  have  been  influenced  by  a  1982  El
Chichón volcano eruption, which could have produced some cooling effects
in 1983 and 1984.23

Ongoing  studies,  such  as  the  European  Space  Agency’s  Influence  of
Solar Activity Cycles on Earth’s Climate project, are attempting to gain a
better  understanding  of  the  complex  nature  of  Sun-Earth  weather  and
climate  relationships.  Yet  it  may  be  a  long  time  before  enough  will  be
known to provide a serious basis for 21st-century climate forecasts. And as
wise modelers recognize, a bad forecast is worse than no forecast at all.24

The Infamous Greenhouse Effect

 

GHGs have been getting a very bad rap in the media to the point that
they are commonly accepted by many as something to avoid at all costs. Yet
without them, it is estimated that our planet would be much colder, and life
as we know it would never have existed.25

We can get a good sense of the greenhouse effect when we experience a
dry, chilly desert at night in comparison with a humid, tropical area. Absent
a  desert  cloud  cover,  the  heat  absorbed  by  the  desert  surface  is  radiated
directly back to space in the form of infrared energy. In tropical locations,
water  molecules  in  the  air  overhead  intercept  ground  heat  and  radiate  it
back toward the surface.26

At the present time, scientists don’t really have a clear idea of how even
the  most  prevalent  GHG,  water  vapor,  affects  climate  change.  They  do
know, however, that water in the form of clouds has extremely important
influences  upon  ways  greenhouse  mechanisms  work,
and  complex 

producing both warming and cooling effects. While the ones we see from
below  tend  to  look  gray,  they  would  appear  white  from  above  if  viewed
from an airplane. Upper parts scatter about half of the incoming sunshine,
which would otherwise warm the surface, back into space. Clouds absorb
some of that radiation as well, but since the cloud tops are cooler than the
ground,  the  overall  heat  loss  is  typically  less.  This  creates  a  complicated
exchange budget between the incoming sunlight in a visible spectrum and
outgoing,  invisible  infrared  thermal  energy.  In  general,  though,  when
everything is taken together, clouds—particularly the low ones—tend to be
net  coolers.  Thin  ones,  however,  have  an  overall  warming  effect.  This
presents large accounting problems for climate modelers, particularly since
they don’t know entirely how clouds form, what types will be created, or
how expansive their cover will be at any given place or time.27

The vast majority of all greenhouse warming effects is caused by water
vapor in the air (considered a gas) and water droplets in clouds, with minor
contributions from CO
 and methane. It is estimated that atmospheric water
vapor  may  account  for  about  70  percent  of  this  effect,  compared  with
somewhere between 4.2 and 8.4 percent for CO
, absorbing solar infrared
over much of the same wavelength band range as CO
 and even more. The
thermal  radiation  emitted  from  the  Earth’s  surface  is  mostly  in  the  7–30
micrometer wavelength range, while the radiation that most readily escapes
back to space with least atmospheric absorption is between about 7 and 14
micrometers,  accounting  for  about  70  percent  of  that  which  is  lost  Water
vapor strongly absorbs in a range of about 4 to 17 micrometers, and CO
most strongly between about 13 and 19 micrometers.28

2

Since warming influences of GHGs have not proven to be as strong as
theoretical  climate  models  have  predicted,  some  scientists  attribute  the
discrepancy  to  underestimated  levels  of  anthropogenic  aerosols.  Aerosols
include atmospheric dust particles and sulfate droplets released from such
human  activities  as  fossil  burning,  forest  clearing,  and  agriculture,  in
combination  with  natural  sources,  such  as  volcanos,  sea  spray,  and  land
wind  erosion.  These  elements  block  some  incoming  sunlight  that  would
otherwise  produce  lower-level  atmosphere  and  surface  warming.  Unlike
CO
, however, which becomes more globally distributed, aerosols tend not
to travel nearly as far from their sources or to remain in the atmosphere as
long.

2

2

2

2

The  climate-forcing  influences  of  aerosols  are  highly  uncertain,  partly
because they rapidly fall out or are washed out of the atmosphere by rainfall
in  days  or  weeks.  This  does  not  allow  them  enough  time  to  be  mixed
uniformly around the globe. For sulfate aerosols it is also very difficult to
distinguish  droplets  from  industrial  versus  biogenic  sources,  because  key
modeling parameters are not well understood.29

Unlike  CO

,  which  is  sometimes  associated  with  unwelcome  warming
but is popular with herbaceous plants, sulfate droplets cause cooling but are
unwelcome in general. They are responsible for urban smog that contributes
to respiratory health problems for people; in the 1970s and 1980s the acid
rain  that  was  believed  to  damage  forests  and  cause  acidification  of  lakes
was  attributed  to  this  smog.  Subsequently,  a  large,  10-year-long  study
concluded that the acid rain alarm had been exaggerated.

2

 

2

Greenhouse Bounties: Why Warm Is Cool

2

Global warming hysteria has gotten many people so heated up that they
overlook  the  consequences  of  the  opposite  condition.  And  assuming  that
small  CO
  increases  may  come  with  the  deal,  as  they  have  in  the  past,
what’s so bad about that? You might even consider the possibility that when
Earth finishes warming its way out of the last cold period, the climate might
slide down the temperature graph into another one, and it might possibly be
a doozy. According to glacial and interglacial cycles over the past 400,000
years or so, be afraid … be very afraid (just kidding). And if anthropogenic
CO
  can  really  make  a  difference  to  help  forestall  or  prevent  that,  let’s
maybe reconsider our interests.30

The  United  Nations’  World  Meteorological  Organization  released  a
December  2009  report  claiming  that  the  10-year  period  from  2000–2009
was  the  warmest  since  records  began  in  1850.  This  assertion  is  rather
comical in light of the fact that no one really knows with any real accuracy
or  certainty  what  the  Earth’s  temperatures  were  even  a  few  decades  ago.
While  the  WMO  says  the  data  is  culled  “from  networks  of  land-based
weather and climate stations, ships and buoys, as well as satellites,” it might
be  reasonable  to  ask  just  how  many  satellites,  ships,  and  buoys  were
measuring  temperatures  in  1850.  And  how  many  ground  stations  and
records have existed or can be trusted? Those that currently exist are highly

concentrated in the US and Europe, while few are located in Asia, Africa,
and South America.31

Distributions and placements of the stations is another matter. Since these
stations were first established 150 years ago, many have seen major urban
development in the areas where they are located, and that has created heat
islands.  Are  these  the  same  stations  used  since  1850?  Have  some  been
added  or  dropped?  Have  record-keeping  procedures  and  equipment
standards remained constant? And how can old data be combined with later,
more  accurate  records,  particularly  when  global  satellite  instruments  that
offer  fuller,  more  accurate  readings  were  not  available  during  about  80
percent of the period referenced?

Claims that the Earth is now warmer than at any other time in the past
1,000 years are readily disputable. A National Academy of Sciences review
panel addressed this issue in 2006. It concluded that all that we can really
be certain about is that the Earth was then warmer than it had been over the
last 400 years. Considering that the LIA accounted for 250 of those years,
that shouldn’t be unduly alarming. History has demonstrated that a return to
prolonged cooling would be a much more legitimate worry.

day.

Yes, global warming—and cooling—is real, and is still going on to this

Now let’s just imagine that our currently observed cooling trend is brief,
and consider the alternative the next time someone nervously asks if you
“believe” in global warming. As a student of history, your answer might be
strongly affirmative and go something like this.

Yes,  I  really  believe  in  global  warming.  Evidence  suggests  that
global warming is critical to keep people comfortable during day and
night,  preventing  millions  from  freezing  to  death  and  starving.  It
provides long growing seasons and excellent plant conditions on large
expanses of unfrozen land that allows essential food to be grown for
8–9  billion  people  around  the  world.  It  enables  many  domestic  and
wildlife species to thrive that couldn’t otherwise survive. And if this
includes  an  upward  temperature  shift  that  causes  some  species  from
the  tropics,  where  the  greatest  diversity  exists,  to  extend  to  higher
latitudes, that isn’t necessarily a bad thing at all.

But that may not be what some of those people want to hear. You might

not be invited to their cocktail parties again.

Section Two

Political Hijackers of Science

Chapter 4

FEVERISH CLIMATE CLAIMS

And  then  maurading  bands  of  mosquitos  will  migrate  to  spread

malaria and other plagues to northern lattitudes.

Promoting  global  warming  alarmism  has  become  an  effective
manipulating  tactic  to  advance  a  variety  of  special-interest  agendas  that
often  have  little  to  do  with  the  environmental  goals  and  social  benefits
espoused  by  responsible  individuals  and  organizations.  In  2006,  for
example, the Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR), a think tank that
actually  supports  CO
  cuts,  provided  an  analysis  of  the  circumstances
surrounding  global  warming  debates  that  were  occurring  in  the  UK:
“Climate  change  is  most  commonly  constructed  through  the  alarmist
repertoire as awesome, terrible, immense, and beyond human control . . . It
is typified by an inflated or extreme lexicon, incorporating an urgent tone
and  cinematic  codes.  It  employs  [a]  quasi-religious  register  of  death  and
doom, and it uses language of acceleration and irreversibility.”1

2

The  IPPR  concluded  that  “alarmism  might  even  become  secretly

thrilling”— effectively a form of what they referred to as “climate porn.”

Mike  Hume,  director  of  the  UK’s  Tyndall  Centre  for  Climate  Change
Research and one of his country’s top climate scientists, spoke out in late
2006 against mounting alarmism. He recognized that climate change is real
and  that  humans  contribute  to  it,  but  he  took  issue  with  such  words  as
“catastrophic”  and  such  claims  as  “climate  change  is  worse  than  we
thought,”  “[we  are  approaching  an]  irreversible  tipping  in  the  Earth’s
climate,” and “[we are] at the point of no return.” He noted that such ideas
are planted as “unguided weapons with which forlornly to threaten society
into behavioral change.”

Recognizing  that  such  language  helps  to  advance  climate  science
funding,  he  concluded,  “We  need  to  take  a  deep  breath  and  pause.  The
language of catastrophe is not the language of science . . . Framing climate
change as an issue which evokes fear and personal stress becomes a self-
fulfilling prophecy. By ‘sexing it up’ we exacerbate, through psychological
amplifiers, the very risks we are trying to ward off.”2

Pounding Our Hot Buttons

 

During the steamy summer of 1988, Senator Al Gore’s Committee on
Science,  Technology  and  Space  hearings  succeeded  in  putting  man-made
global warming at center stage in the national political arena. (Remember,
however,  that  barely  a  decade  earlier  an  alarm,  based  on  the  observed
cooling  trend  during  the  1960s  and  late  1970s,  signaled  the  coming  of  a
new  Ice  Age.)  James  Hansen’s  rather  mild  affirmation  of  that  possibility
was  presented  as  persuasive  and  confident  proof.  This  certainty  was
reinforced  in  a  book  titled  World  on  Fire:  Saving  an  Endangered  Earth,
written  by  Democrat  and  Senate  Majority  Leader  George  Mitchell  and
published 
the  father  of  a  prominent
environmental  activist,  urged  recognition  of  greenhouse  warming  as  a
global  threat.  By  that  time,  the  popular  media  in  Europe  and  the  United
States  had  reached  a  common  conclusion:  They  were  declaring  that  “all
scientists” agreed that warming was real and had catastrophic potential, and
that rising atmospheric CO
 levels released by burning fossils must be the
cause.3

in  1991.  Senator  Mitchell, 

2

Since  the  late  1980s  and  early  1990s,  we  have  been  subjected  to  a
barrage of global warming crisis alerts. Many such alerts find their origin in
doomsday  predictions  repeatedly  rendered  by  alarmist  James  Hansen  and
visually dramatized in Mr. Gore’s print and film productions. These media
present  powerful  statements  and  graphic  images  that  leave  lasting
impressions  of  global  warming  devastation,  present  and  future,  which  is
represented to be based upon science. It’s awesome to imagine a Manhattan
under water, heartbreaking to see polar bears and penguins become extinct,
and terrifying to think of horrible diseases that are spreading—all because
of us.4

Others  have  gotten  into  the  act,  targeting  impressionable  young  minds
and sensitive big hearts with messages of fear and guilt. An example is the
children’s  book  The  North  Pole  Was  Here,  authored  by  New  York  Times
reporter Andrew Revkin. It warns children that some day it may be “easier
to sail than stand on the North Pole in summer.”5 Of course, it’s mostly their
parents’  fault  because  of  the  nasty  CO
  they  produce  driving  the  kids  to
school.

Many  leading  scientists  (who  don’t  work  for  oil  companies)  strongly
disagree  with  these  prognoses  and  the  alleged  science  behind  them.  Let’s
consider some of their reasons.

2

Lower Tides of Despair

 

Although  the  UN  IPCC  is  one  of  the  biggest  purveyors  of  climate
change hysteria, the predictions in its own 2007 AR4 report “Summary for
Policymakers” stating that sea levels will “probably” rise between 7.08 and
23.22  inches  during  the  21st  century  may  at  least  relieve  some  angst
regarding the mother of all scares. After all, that’s about twenty times less
than the 20- to 40-foot levels envisioned in the Academy Award–winning
documentary An Inconvenient Truth.

The  IPCC  AR4  report  confirmed  that  unlike  the  spectacular  scenario
depicted  in  the  film,  Antarctica’s  ice  sheets  will  “remain  too  cold  for
surface melting,” and the continent is “expected to gain [water] mass due to
increased  snowfall.”  It  also  states  that  no  scientific  consensus  exists  that
Greenland’s  ice  caps  are  melting  enough  to  contribute  to  increased  sea
levels.  While  it  acknowledges  unknowns,  including  some  observed

variability and local changes in glaciers that could contribute to increased
sea  levels,  it  concludes  that  overall,  “there  is  no  consensus  on  their
magnitude.”

And  what  about  the  AR4’s  probable  projection  of  the  oceans  rising
anywhere from 7.08 inches to 23.22 inches in the 21st century? A study in
the July 26, 2009, issue of Nature Geoscience, a top journal in the field, had
concluded  that  the  investigation  “strengthens  confidence  with  which  one
may interpret the IPCC results.” The authors later retracted the report, titled
“Constraints in Future Sea-Level Rise from Post Sea-Level Changes,” after
two  other  scientists  pointed  out  technical  research  errors.  One  involved  a
miscalculation, and the other cited incomplete information about ice sheet
melting,  which  caused  the  conclusions  to  be  highly  uncertain.6  The
researchers had used fossil coral data and temperature records derived from
ice core measurements to reconstruct how the sea level has fluctuated with
temperature since the peak of the last Ice Age and to project how it would
rise with predicted warming over the next few decades.

According to a recent study conducted by US and Dutch scientists that
appeared in the journal Nature Geoscience, previous estimates of ice melt
rate losses in Greenland and West Antarctica may have been exaggerated as
double the actual rate. The earlier projections apparently failed to account
for  rebounding  changes  in  the  Earth’s  crust  following  the  last  Ice  Age,
referred 
isostatic  adjustment.”  Lead  researcher  Bert
Vermeersen of Delft Technical University in the Netherlands described the
phenomena  as  being  similar  to  the  way  a  mattress  compressed  by  the
weight of a sleeper recovers its shape when the person gets up. The total
revised annual contributions of the combined ice melts to ocean rise would
amount to only about 1.5 mm (0.1 inch), similar to a 1.8 mm (0.07 inch)
annual rise in the early 1960s.7

to  as  “glacial 

Hendrik Tennekes, former director of research at the Netherlands Royal
National Meteorological Institute, believes that the sea level has flattened
since  2006.  He  also  disputes  claims  that  there  has  been  any  statistically
significant warming of upper ocean surfaces since 2003, pointing out that
Arctic Sea anomalies have actually decreased.8

Dr.  Tennekes  places  much  of  the  blame  for  poor  sea  level  forecasting
upon  a  failure  to  understand  and  include  influences  of  natural  events  in
models. He reported to the well-known climate science blog Climate Depot:
“From  my  perspective  it  is  not  a  little  bit  alarming  that  the  current

generation of climate models cannot simulate such fundamental phenomena
as the Pacific Decadal Oscillation. I will not trust any climate model until it
can  accurately  represent  the  PDO  and  other  slow  features  of  the  world
ocean circulation. Even then I would remain skeptical about the potential
predictive skill of such a model many tens of years into the future.”9

Nils-Axel  Mörner  is  head  of  the  Paleogeophysics  and  Geodynamics
department  at  Stockholm  University  in  Sweden;  past  president  of  the
INQUA Commission on Sea Level Changes and Coastal Evolution; leader
of the Maldives Sea Level Project; and one of the UN’s “expert reviewers”
of the IPCC’s 2001 and 2007 reports. He agrees that concerns about rising
sea  levels  are  totally  unfounded.  His  research  in  this  area  has  taken  him
around  the  world,  from  Greenland  to  Antarctica  and  to  most  coastal
regions.10

Dr. Mörner observes that of the twenty-two IPCC authors, none was a sea
level specialist. He later said, “So all this talk that sea level is rising, this
comes  from  the  computer  modeling,  not  from  observations  .  .  .  The  new
level, which has been stable, has not changed in the last 35 years . . . But
they  [IPCC]  need  a  rise,  because  if  there  is  no  rise,  there  is  no  death
threat  .  .  .  If  you  want  a  grant  for  a  research  project  in  climatology,  it  is
written  into  the  document  that  there  ‘must’  be  a  focus  on  global
warming . . . That is really bad, because then you start asking for the answer
you want to get.”11

According to studies by the INQUA commission, ocean levels have even
fallen  in  recent  decades.  The  Indian  Ocean,  for  example,  was  higher
between  1900  and  1970  than  it  has  been  since.12  The  real  sea  change,  it
appears, has been in the way climatologists have predicted sea levels.

Science on Thin Ice

 

Much of the specter of global warming alarm centers upon Greenland
and  upon  concerns  that  glaciers  will  cause  disastrous  sea  level  rise.  A
December 2005 BBC feature reported that two massive glaciers in eastern
Greenland,  Kangderlugssuaq  and  Helheim,  were  melting,  with  water
“racing to the sea.” It was predicted that continued recession of more than 2
miles  per  year  would  be  catastrophic.  That  prognosis  proved  premature,
however. Only 18 months later, and despite slightly warmer temperatures,

the melting rate of both glaciers not only slowed down and stopped but also
had  actually  reversed,  and  the  glaciers  began  expanding  in  size.  Landsat
images revealed that by August 30, 2006, Helheim had advanced beyond its
1933 boundary.13

Even  though  Greenland  has  been  experiencing  a  slight  warming  trend,
satellite measurements show that the ice cap is accumulating snow growth
at  a  rate  of  about  2.1  inches  per  year.  Also  consider  that  Greenland’s
temperatures  over  the  past  decade  were  no  warmer  than  several  others
recorded during the 20th century; they only recently began to exceed those
of  the  1930s,  and  the  1980s  and  1990s  were  colder  than  the  previous  6
decades.  Temperatures  in  the  late  12th  century  in  Greenland  were
considerably warmer than they have been in recent years.14

Then,  on  March  31,  2010,  scientists  were  once  again  surprised.
According to the National Snow and Ice Data Center, Arctic sea ice reached
the greatest expanse for that late date recorded since 1979, when satellite
records commenced. The growth was largely attributed to cold weather and
winds from the north over the Bering and Barents seas. So, what does this
prove?  Maybe  very  little—just  about  as  little  as  you  probably  heard  it
reported in the news.

As reported by the Greenland glacier study lead author Ian Howat, in a
February  8,  2007,  New  York  Times  interview:  “Greenland  was  about  as
warm or warmer in the 1930s and 1940s, and many glaciers were smaller
than they are now . . . Of course, we didn’t know very much about how the
glacier dynamics changed then, because we didn’t have satellites to observe
it.  However,  it  does  suggest  that  large  variations  in  sheet  dynamics  can
occur from natural variability.” Further on in the interview he concluded,
“Special care must be taken in how these and other mass-loss estimates are
evaluated,  particularly  when  extrapolating  into  the  future,  because  short-
term spikes could yield erroneous long-term trends.”15

The International Arctic Research Center reported a 29 percent expansion
of  Arctic  sea  ice  in  2008  over  2007’s  total.  Alaska  also  experienced  an
unusually large amount of winter ice and snow during 2007–2008, followed
by extremely cold temperatures in June, July, and August. “In June, I was
surprised to see snow still at sea level in Prince William Sound,” reported
US Geological Survey (USGS) glaciologist Bruce Molnia. “On the Juneau
Icefield,  there  was  still  20  feet  of  new  snow  on  the  surface  of  the  Taku
Glacier in late July.”16

Snow Jobs

 

The IPCC has recently admitted that the assertion in its 2007 report that
the Himalayan glaciers would likely melt by 2035 due to man-made global
warming is false. That assertion had prompted great alarm across southern
and eastern Asia, where glaciers feed the major rivers. Even though many
glacier  experts  had  considered  such  a  prediction  to  be  preposterous,  the
IPCC had kept it in its report. As it turned out, the prediction was traced to
a  speculative  magazine  article  authored  by  an  Indian  glaciologist,  Syed
Hasnain, which had no supporting science behind it Mr. Hasnain works for
a research company headed by IPCC’s chairman, Rajendra Pachauri. IPCC
author Marari Lai admitted to the London Daily Mail, “We thought that if
we  can  highlight  it,  it  will  impact  policymakers  and  politicians  and
encourage them to take concrete action.”17

Other  world  climate  alarm  bells  chimed  when  it  was  reported  in  the
media that September 2007 satellite images revealed the Northwest Passage
—a  sea  route  between  the  UK  and  Asia  across  the  top  of  the  Canadian
Arctic Circle—had opened for the first time in recorded history.18 First, it
should  be  pointed  out  that  recorded  history  in  this  regard  began  only  as
recently as 1979, when satellite monitoring began. It should also be noted
that the route froze again just a few months later (winter 2007–2008). In
fact,  the  average  Arctic  sea  ice  extent  for  the  month  of  December  2008
(4.84 million square miles) was actually 54,000 square miles greater than in
December 2007; worldwide at that time, the average sea ice coverage was
about the same as it had been in 1979.19

There is clear evidence that the Northwest Passage in reality has opened
on previous occasions. The sea ice had been thinning ever since the end of
the  LIA  (before  the  Industrial  Revolution),  and  it  had  already  warmed
enough so that Eskimos first began fishing there for newly migrating cod in
the 1920s.

In  diary  entries  he  wrote  in  1903,  sailor  Roald  Amundsen  reported  his
experience on board a ship in those waters: “The Northwest Passage was
done  [had  opened].  My  boyhood  dream—at 
it  was
accomplished. A strange feeling welled up in my throat; I was somewhat
over-strained  and  worn—it  was  weakness  in  me—but  I  felt  tears  in  my
eyes. Vessel in sight . . . Vessel in sight.”20

the  moment 

During  the  early  1940s  a  Royal  Canadian  Mounted  Police  (RCMP)
schooner assigned to Arctic patrol made regular trips through the Northwest
Passage.21 And in 2000 (that is to say, 7 years before the first-ever satellite
records),  another  RCMP  patrol  vessel  was  renamed  the  St.  Roch  II  and
recreated the voyage, making the crossing in only three weeks. The crew
reported  seeing  very  little  ice  except  for  the  occasional  icebergs  they
passed.22

it  was  discovered 

In  February  2009, 

that  scientists  have  been
underestimating the regrowth of Arctic sea ice by an area larger than the
state of California (twice as large as New Zealand). The errors are attributed
to faulty sensors on the ice.23 And although the Arctic ice expanse was still
slightly smaller in 2008 as compared with 1979, the Antarctic expanse was
larger. The University of Illinois Arctic Climate Research Center posted an
analysis in January 2009 concluding that global sea ice coverage in 2008
was nearly the same as satellites revealed in 1979.24

Research  conducted  by  the  Scripps  Institution  of  Oceanography  at  the
University of California–San Diego has turned up evidence that polar ice
caps at least half as large as those we see now existed when Earth was at its
warmest (72ºF to 77ºF), about 91 million years ago. That conclusion was
based upon a study of tiny marine fossils, collected from the ocean floor,
that contained a particular telltale isotope of oxygen molecules (d180). The
study’s  coauthor,  Richard  Norris,  observed:  “Until  now  it  was  formerly
believed  no  glaciers  existed  on  the  poles  prior  to  the  development  of  the
Antarctic ice sheet about 33 million years ago . . . This study demonstrates
that  even  the  superwarm  climates  of  the  Cretaceous  Thermal  Maximum
were not enough to prevent ice growth.”25

To  further  support  their  conclusions,  the  research  team  pointed  to
evidence  that  sea  levels  fell  between  82  and  131  feet  during  the  period
examined.  This  could  be  expected  when  that  much  water  became
landlocked in massive ice volumes.

As broadly advertised, it’s true that famous glaciers at the peak of Mt.
Kilimanjaro are indeed receding. Actually, they have been doing so since
1890, according to research by Kaser et al., published in the International
Journal of Climatology  (2004).  By  1936,  when  Ernest  Hemingway’s  The
Snows  of  Kilimanjaro  was  released,  the  mountain  had  already  lost  more
than  half  of  its  surface  ice  area  over  a  period  of  56  years.  According  to
another report, published in Geophysical Research Letters (2006) by N. J.

Kullen et al., this is being caused by a shift toward drier conditions, not by
weather temperatures, that began around 1800.26

Global Warming “Spokesbears”

 

Are polar bears becoming global warming victims? Mr. Gore says they
are, and that opinion, along with grief-evoking images, has been expressed
by  leading  media  programs  and  commentators.  Even  the  DOI  seems  to
believe  this;  it  has  recently  added  polar  bears  to  the  Endangered  Species
Act (ESA) listing. It must be true, right?

A  January  20,  2008,  global  warming  special  hosted  by  Scott  Pelley
reported  that  polar  bears  “may  be  headed  toward  extinction,”  noting  that
researchers  are  finding  them  to  be  thinner  and  weaker,  with  less  time  to
stock up on fat reserves because ice sheets are melting too fast. Mr. Pelley
has strong convictions about global warming. He is the same reporter who
once compared global warming skeptics to Holocaust deniers. Nick Lunn,
the researcher featured in that special broadcast, somberly observed that the
polar bear population in the Western Hudson Bay has declined during  the
last  decade  from  about  twelve  hundred  in  the  mid-1990s  to  about  a
thousand  now.  What  wasn’t  mentioned  is  that  the  total  population,
estimated  to  be  about  five  thousand  in  the  1970s,  has  increased  to  about
twenty-five thousand today. And though it is true that the Western Hudson
Bay population has been seeing some decline, other groups are stable and
even increasing in number.

ABC’s  Sam  Champion  told  Good  Morning  America  audiences  on
February  8,  2008,  that  a  2-degree  increase  in  global  temperatures  would
make  “polar  bears  struggle  to  survive.”  On  November  6,  2007,  NBC’s
Today Show cohost, Matt Lauer, said the bears “are facing an epic struggle
for survival.” Reporter Kerry Sanders warned, “If the Arctic ice continues
to melt in the next 100 years, the US Wildlife Service says ‘the only place
you’ll find a polar bear on Earth will be at the zoo.’” On a September 9,
2007, Good Morning America broadcast, Kate Snow called polar bears “the
newest victims of global warming.” The same segment featured Dr. Steven
Amstrup,  a  USGS  scientist,  who  stated  that  bears  “could  be  absent  from
almost all their range by the middle of this century.”27

It may be interesting to note that only 5 years earlier, a 2002 study by the
same  USGS  had  reported  that  the  “[polar  bear]  populations  may  now  be
near historic highs.”28

Dr. Mitchell Taylor, manager of wildlife research for the Government of
the Canadian Territory of Nunavut, agreed with the US Geological Survey’s
2002  assessment  and  recently  reported  that  his  organization’s  research
shows  that  the  Canadian  polar  bear  population  has  increased  about  25
percent  during  the  past  decade  (from  about  twelve  thousand  to  fifteen
thousand).29  Even  Polar  Bears  International,  a  nonprofit  organization  that
works to protect the animals, rates only five groups as “declining,” another
five  as  “stable,”  one  as  “increasing,”  and  others  as  “data  deficient”
(impossible to measure) out of nineteen total world populations.30

A problem with such reasoning—one that even Polar Bears International
points out—is that swimming up to a hundred miles is not a big deal for the
animals. The drowned bears that Gore referred to in his film turned out to
be victims of a storm, not a lack of ice.

On March 28, 2008, Paul Milikin, a National Geographic photographer,
stated on ABC’s Good Morning America, “I realize what I need to do is try
and  tell  these  stories  through  National  Geographic  magazine  by  using

We continue to see the polar bear represented as the “spokesanimal” for
global  warming  threats.  Al  Gore’s  An  Inconvenient  Truth  shows  one
apparently drowning because it is too tired from swimming in search of ice
that we have caused to melt.

CBS  reporter  Daniel  Sieberg,  in  an  August  14,  2007,  segment  of  the
Evening  News,  echoed  this  presumption,  explaining  that,  “Less  ice  also
means the polar bears spend more time in the water, sometimes for so long
they  drown.”  An  April  2006  Time  magazine  cover  featured  a  bear
seemingly  “stranded”  on  melting  ice.  The  Defenders  of  Wildlife  website
explains: “Loss of sea ice leads to higher energy requirements to locate prey
and a shortage of food. This causes higher mortality rates among cubs and
reduction in size among first-year adult males.” Such claims appear to be
supported  by  anecdotal  evidence  that  four  polar  bears  drowned  while
swimming in Alaska’s Beaufort Sea, and that three polar bears attacked and
ate others, allegedly due to hunger.31 Some environmentalists also contend
that  human-induced  global  warming,  which  will  cause  most  of  the  North
Pole ice to melt in the next 50 years, will make it impossible for the bears to
hunt seals, their preferred prey.

animals, such as polar bears, to say that if we lose sea ice in the Arctic, and
projections are to lose sea ice in the next twenty to fifty years, we ultimately
are going to lose polar bears as well.”

He  went  on  to  acknowledge  how  the  photograph  featured  on  Time’s
cover in 2006, the seemingly “distressed” polar bear, came about: “It was
just a moment where I was not thinking clearly. I was ten feet away, lying
on my belly, and this bear is shaking water. And he was just … he took a
lunge at me basically, but as [he] lunged up and was coming down on me,
the ice broke and got away. And my first thought was, ‘I know I have the
shot,’ so I was really excited that this shot would help tell the story that I
want to tell about melting ice.”32

Biologist Mitchell Taylor pointed out in his testimony to the US Fish and
Wildlife Service (FWS) that modest warming may actually be beneficial to
polar bears; it could both provide a better habitat for seals and dramatically
boost the growth of blueberries, which the bears feed upon. In those cases
where bear weights and numbers are declining, he thinks the cause is too
many bears are competing for food, not Arctic warming.33

You  might  ask,  what  is  the  real  basis  for  predicting  these  polar  bear
extinctions?  Perhaps  you  may  have  guessed  by  now:  It’s  those  climate
models that predict a dire, and warm, future.

A 2006 US DOI news release stated that it would consider further polar
bear  protection  programs,  and  the  agency  acknowledged  that  “Alaska
populations have not experienced a statistically significant decline, but Fish
and  Wildlife  Service  biologists  are  concerned  that  they  may  face  such
decline in the future.”34

FWS  then  requested  nine  administrative  reports  from  government
agencies to bolster its case for listing the bears as an endangered species.
All  those  reports  were  based  upon  climate  models  that  shared  common
assumptions about sea ice levels during the 21st century—namely, that the
area of the Arctic covered by sea ice in summer would decline by more than
two-thirds, causing seal populations to decline. No ice, no seals; no seals,
no bears; case closed.

Alaska’s former governor Sarah Palin, along with many of the citizens
she  served,  was  and  is  not  happy  about  the  DOI’s  decision  to  add  polar
bears to the Endangered Species Act list. And this isn’t because Alaskans
don’t like bears. In an October 2007 press release, Palin argued, “[Listing] a
currently healthy species based entirely on highly speculative and uncertain

climate and ice modeling and equally uncertain and speculative modeling of
impacts  on  a  species  would  be  unprecedented.  Listing  polar  bears  under
ESA could actually harm many of the existing and highly successful polar
bear conservation measures.”35

And why would anyone want to do that? Some suspicious minds wonder
if maybe the main reason is oil drilling rather than bear welfare. As Ben
Lieberman  wrote  in  a  January  25,  2008,  Web  memo  for  the  Heritage
Foundation, “The first victim of listing would be new oil and natural gas
production throughout [Alaska] and its surrounding waters. It would put an
end  to  any  chances  of  opening  up  a  small  portion  of  the  Arctic  National
Wildlife Refuge (ANWR), estimated to contain 10 billion barrels of oil—
nearly 15 years’ worth of current imports from Saudi Arabia.”36

So  now  that  polar  bears  are  officially  “endangered,”  the  DOI,  working
through  the  Endangered  Species  Act,  has  been  granted  broad  powers  to
work with other federal agencies to “solve the problem” by linking global
warming threats to energy procurement and carbon emissions, two central
agenda priorities under one legislative action. As Myron Ebell, director of
global  warming  policy  at  the  Competitive  Enterprise  Institute,  postulates,
“The larger goal is to compel regulatory controls on energy use that global
warming alarmists have been unable to persuade Congress to enact. “37

The  polar  bear  issue  illustrates  how  interest  groups  have  used  the
pretense of a global warming crisis to advance other agendas. Still, if some
polar  bears  gain  from  the  deception,  it’s  probably  only  fair.  After  all,
consider all of the UN diplomats to whom we grant immunity, and they’re
certainly not an endangered population either.

Penguins: The Emperor Still Needs Warm Clothes

 

So,  what  about  the  overheated  emperor  penguins  we’ve  been  told  to
worry about? Like polar bear cubs (but not necessarily the big, ferocious
adults), they’re cute too! Think about all those noble creatures we fell in
love  with  in  the  big  hit  movie  March  of  the  Penguins  as  they  battled  to
survive  the  coldest  weather  conditions  on  Earth.  And  now  we’re  killing
them by making the Earth too warm. It seems like we’re always messing
things up. Fortunately, however, it appears that the Antarctic climate has a
changing mind of its own.38

2

Much  of  the  media  attention  to  climate  change  impacts  upon  penguin
populations  draws  heavily  upon  press  reports  released  by  the  World
Wildlife Fund (WWF), which advocates large and immediate CO
 emission
restrictions.  Those  reports  invariably  emphasize  connections  between
climate  change  and  penguin  declines,  focusing  upon  carefully  selected
colonies that have experienced diminished populations during the past 10 to
20 years or so. Other colonies that show stable or expanding populations
aren’t deemed to be as interesting.

Antarctica is a huge place that exhibits a variety of climate fluctuations
and trends at various temporal and spatial scales. The Antarctic Peninsula,
which  gets  a  lot  of  media  attention  for  the  study  of  periodic  warming,
comprises  only  about  2  percent  of  the  continent;  over  the  rest  of  the
continent, temperature changes over the past 30 to 40 years have been slight
or  undetectable.  And  while  sea  ice  extent  may  be  declining  off  the
peninsula,  it  has  changed  little,  on  average—and  in  some  areas  even  has
increased—around the continent in total.

Records show that overall, the continent of Antarctica has warmed about
1ºF  since  1957,  yet  average  temperatures  still  remain  about  50  degrees
below  zero.  West  Antarctica,  which  is  most  heavily  influenced  by
atmospheric and ocean changes occurring thousands of miles to the north, is
about  20  degrees  warmer  than  East  Antarctica  and  has  warmed  twice  as
fast. But temperature changes in the area rose up to five times more rapidly
in  the  1940s,  and  then  they  fell  by  the  same  amount  after  the  warming
effects of a major El Niño cycle were depleted.39

The  1997  El  Niño  was  one  of  the  most  severe  during  the  entire  last
century,  and  1998  was  an  exceptionally  warm  year.  Still,  according  to
Australia’s Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation,
satellite  measurements  indicate  that  East  Antarctica  north  of  latitude  81°
south gained up to 500 billion tons of ice over the last decade—one that Al
Gore claimed to be the warmest in 100 years.40

Due  to  unique  atmosphere-related  weather  influences,  warming  in
Antarctica  can  actually  bring  more  snowfall  to  the  continent.  Unlike
conditions  over  most  of  the  globe,  where  the  stratosphere  begins  at  an
altitude  of  8  to  10  miles  above  the  Earth’s  surface,  the  stratosphere  over
Antarctica  begins  at  an  altitude  of  about  5  miles,  or  roughly  25,000  feet
above  sea  level.  As  airstreams  over  the  flat  ocean  encounter  the  rougher
landmass, they are slowed, and they have nowhere to go but up. In doing

so, the air becomes compressed between the surface and the stratosphere (a
phenomenon called “convergence”). This forms shallow-height clouds that
both  reflect  the  Sun’s  energy  up  toward  space  (net  cooling)  and  cause
precipitation.  Ocean  warming  produces  more  humid  air  currents  (more
clouds and snow).

There  is  no  clear  connection  between  Antarctica’s  climate  and  average
surface  temperatures  elsewhere  around  the  globe,  and  certainly  none  that
can be linked to human influences. But count on it to remain very cold.

The  only  long-term  emperor  penguin  studies  have  taken  place  in  East
Antarctica: at Terre Adélie, on the Mawson Coast, and on the Prince Olav
Coast/Riiser-Larsen  Peninsula.  Although  their  numbers  have  dwindled
around the Antarctic Peninsula near Palmer Station, on Anvers Island, the
Terre  Adélie  population  has  tripled  since  the  1950s  at  Marguerite  Bay,
about  400  kilometers  to  the  south.  Nevertheless,  the  population  at  Terre
Adélie, which experienced a significant decline in the 1970s, had begun to
stabilize  until  recently,  and  it  then  declined  again.  Similarly,  emperor
colonies at Taylor Glacier and Auster, along the Mawson Coast, seemed to
be  stable  while  monitored  from  1988  to  1999,  but  the  Prince  Olav
Coast/Riiser-Larsen Peninsula populations recently declined in 2000.

Conditions  at  Palmer  Station  are  warming,  and  therefore  the  area  is
readily  accessible  for  observation.  Researchers  are  witnessing  a  large
proliferation  of  southern  fur  seals  and  elephant  seals  that  were  present
during  the  1990s  only  as  small  colonies.  One  population  formerly  of  six
seals  now  numbers  about  five  thousand.  Such  species  that  prefer  open
water, which was limited to the northern and eastern parts of the peninsula
where the ocean didn’t freeze in winter, are expanding their ranges. As the
“polar”  ecosystem  has  shifted  southward,  so  have  the  emperor  penguins
migrated from Terre Adélie. While they seem to like lots of ice, they don’t
like too much of it; its greater expanse makes it too strenuous to reach open
water for foraging. David Ainley of H. T. Harvey & Associates, who studies
these penguins in the southern Ross Sea area, observes, “As ice breaks up,
there should be more habitat, and we should see more penguins.”41

About 25 percent of all emperor penguins worldwide are believed to live
near  the  Ross  Sea,  an  area  of  Antarctica  subject  to  changing  climate
patterns.  Researchers  have  not  yet  found  evidence  to  suggest  either  an
overall increase or a decrease in the emperor population between 1983 and
2005.

To  sum  up  the  data,  local  and  regional  climate  variations,  which  have
always occurred along with fluctuations in aquatic food abundance, impact
various penguin species and colonies differently. Some are expanding their
ranges, some groups are declining in numbers while others are growing, and
most appear to be doing pretty well. Because of their remote habitat, which
makes them so difficult to observe, a lot remains to be known about many
aquatic  mammals  and  birds,  including  emperor  penguin  populations.
Satellite  imaging  is  used,  yet  many  studies  have  concluded  that  data
remains  insufficient  for  broad  analysis  of  impacts,  such  as  any  related  to
climate change.

Coral Catastrophes: Taking Claims with a Pinch of Salt

 

2

Such organizations as WWF and the Pew Charitable Trusts have raised
the issue of global warming and CO
 impacts upon the bleaching (killing) of
coral reefs as a key environmental concern. Such influences are not to be
taken  lightly,  because  ocean  reefs,  like  the  world’s  rain  forests,  are  vital
habitats  for  wide  varieties  of  life  and  thus  deserve  protection.  But  as  Dr.
Gary Sharp, a marine biologist who is the scientific director of the Center
for Climate/Ocean Resources Study in Salinas, California, points out, “We
need to look closely at what is most likely to affect the reefs, and what is
not.”42 (According to its website, the center is linked with the International
Oceanographic  Data  &  Information  Exchange  of  the  Intergovernmental
Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO.) Dr. Sharp cautions about being
too  alarmed  regarding  influences  of  anthropogenic  greenhouse  emissions
for several reasons.

He observes that conjectures that global warming will kill reefs are based
upon predictions that sea temperatures may increase about 3.6ºF over the
next  hundred  years  and  that  rising  CO
  levels  are  making  oceans  more
acidic. Yet coral reefs currently exist in waters with temperature gradients
of 10.8ºF–12.6ºF, so all reefs aren’t likely to die even if that increase were
to occur. It’s also not very probable that such an increase will happen. The
Earth’s ocean circulation pattern maintains a relatively narrow temperature
boundary according to natural cycles, and it would be extremely unusual for
sea surface temperatures in the open ocean to change that much.

2

The oceans appear to now be heading into one of their periodic cooling
phases  in  accordance  with  a  typical  55-to-70-year  dipolar  warm/cool
pattern.  Whether  ocean  waters  warm  or  cool  depends  upon  where  you
happen  to  be  within  these  large-scale  processes.  The  current  trend  is
ongoing and is expected to dominate global circulation between 2008 and
2012. The effect of this cycle can be witnessed in recent long, cold winters
with  near-record  low  temperatures  caused  by  highly  mobile  polar  cold
fronts measured as cold high-pressure regions in various places. This cold
phase  may  be  expected  to  continue  for  about  20  to  25  years  before  a
transition into another epoch of generally warmer, remedial climate.

And what about claims made by the Pew Charitable Trust that CO

 from
burning  fossils  is  “acidifying”  the  oceans?  This  alarm  is  primarily  based
upon  a  June  2006  release  of  data  from  a  NOAA  study  showing  that  the
water sampled from our oceans had an average pH of approximately 8.175
(0.025  units),  which  had  declined  from  8.2;  this  indicates  the  water  had
become  more  acidic  over  the  last  15  years.  However,  recent  studies  also
show  that  the  pH  difference  was  twelve  times  that  miniscule  change  (8.5
units) at the time of the last glaciation period, and the reefs thrived under
that  falling  pH.  It  would  require  a  drop  forty-seven  times  more  than  that
recorded by NOAA to reach a pH level of 7—the point when acid/alkaline
neutrality would occur and the coral would die. That would not only require
that oceans absorb billions more tons of CO
 than mankind is ever going to
emit; it would also require that its buffering agents—carbonate, nitrate, and
other  radicals  that  minimize  ocean  acidity  by  accepting  and  expelling
hydrogen  ions—disappear.  In  fact,  CO
  is  a  fundamental  building  block
necessary for coral to exist.

2

2

2

Pandemic Pestilence: The Political Variety

 

What is it, exactly, that we are supposed to be alarmed about regarding
global  warming?  It  seems  that  Mr.  Gore’s  predicted  20-  to  40-foot  ocean
rise isn’t very credible, even to the IPCC, so Palm Beach property owners
can  relax.  Polar  bears  can  carry  on  their  normal  business  of  merrily
multiplying, except for the invasions of privacy posed by polar paparazzi.
Penguins  are  moving  south,  a  trend  paralleling  that  of  snowbirds  on  this

continent. And bleached coral reefs aren’t either likely or sexy enough to
compete with bleached blondes for popular centerfold attention.

Okay,  let’s  try  examining  the  threat  of  global  warming  causing  really
nasty tropical diseases to spread, just as An Inconvenient Truth dramatically
warns.  That  should  warrant  some  fear.  Well,  maybe  not.  At  least  Paul
Reiter,  a  medical  entomologist  and  professor  at  the  Pasteur  Institute  in
Paris, doesn’t think so. He is one of the scientists featured in the film The
Greatest Global Warming Swindle, produced by WAG-TV in Great Britain
in response to the Gore movie. Dr. Reiter was also a contributory author of
the IPCC’s 2001 report who resigned because he regarded the processes to
be driven by agenda rather than science. He later threatened to sue the IPCC
if  they  didn’t  remove  his  name  from  the  report  he  didn’t  wish  to  be
associated with.43

Professor  Reiter’s  career  has  been  devoted  primarily  to  studying  such
mosquito-borne  diseases  as  malaria,  dengue,  yellow  fever,  and  West  Nile
virus,  among  others.  He  takes  special  issue  with  any  notion  that  global
warming is spreading such illnesses by extending the carriers to formerly
colder locales where they didn’t previously exist. In reference to statements
in An Inconvenient Truth that the African cities of Nairobi and Harare were
founded  above  the  mosquito  line  to  avoid  malaria,  and  that  now  the
mosquitoes  are  moving  to  those  higher  altitudes,  Dr.  Reiter  comments,
“Gore  is  completely  wrong  here—malaria  has  been  documented  at  an
altitude of 8,200 feet—Nairobi and Harare are at altitudes of about 4,920
feet. The new altitudes of malaria are lower than those recorded 100 years
ago. None of the 30 so-called new diseases Gore references are attributable
to global warming. None.”44

Although  few  people  seem  to  realize  it,  malaria  was  once  rampant
throughout  cold  parts  of  Europe,  the  US,  and  Canada,  extending  into  the
20th century. It was one of the major causes of troop morbidity during the
Russian/Finnish War of the 1940s, and an earlier massive epidemic in the
1920s went up through Siberia and into Archangel on the White Sea near
the Arctic Circle. Still, many continue to regard malaria and dengue as top
climate change dangers—far more dangerous than sea level rise.

Dr.  Reiter  submitted  written  testimony  to  the  British  House  of  Lords
Select Committee on Economic Affairs on March 31, 2005. His testimony
included the following critique of the chapter written by Working Group II

—much  of  which  was  devoted  to  mosquito-borne  diseases,  principally
malaria—for the IPCC's Second Assessment Report:

The scientific literature on mosquito-borne diseases is voluminous,
yet  the  text  references  in  the  chapter  were  restricted  to  a  handful  of
articles, many of them relatively obscure, and nearly all suggesting an
increase in prevalence of disease in a warmer climate. The paucity of
information  was  hardly  surprising:  Not  one  of  the  lead  authors  had
ever  written  a  research  paper  on  the  subject!  Moreover,  two  of  the
authors,  both  physicians,  had  spent 
their  entire  careers  as
environmental  activists.  One  of 
these  activists  has  published
“professional”  articles  as  an  “expert”  on  32  subjects,  ranging  from
mercury poisoning to land mines, globalization to allergies, and West
Nile virus to AIDS.45

Hurricane Hullabaloo

 

Despite  large  modeling  uncertainties  with  undemonstrated  reliability
even over short forecast periods, the IPCC’s “Climate Change 2007” AR4
report “Summary for Policymakers” predicts (with greater than 66 percent
confidence) that the next century will experience an increase in droughts,
tropical cyclones, and extreme high tides. Yet as John Christy, a professor
of  atmospheric  science  at  the  University  of  Alabama,  points  out  in  an
October  20,  2000,  article  published  in  NASA  Science,  “The  fact  that
different  computer  models  often  produce  different  forecasts  doesn’t  offer
much reassurance. For example, one model predicted that the Southeastern
US  would  become  more  jungle-like  in  the  next  century,  while  another
model predicted the same region would become a dried-out savanna.”46

An event preceding the release of the 2007 AR4 summary report offers
reasons to be even less confident about some of the IPCC’s conclusions. It
occurred following the summer of 2004, a year when a deadly storm season
brought  five  devastating  hurricanes  that  made  landfall  in  Florida.  The
terrible  destruction  made  headlines  throughout  the  world,  and  many
conjectured the hurricanes were linked to global warming.

Opportunities to capitalize on the unusual and terrifying hurricane pattern
to validate man-made global warming threats were not lost on some IPCC

officials,  who  rapidly  responded.  In  October  2004,  the  IPCC’s  Kevin
Trenberth participated in a press conference that announced, “Experts warn
global  warming  likely  to  continue  spurring  more  outbreaks  of  intense
activity.”  But  there  was  a  serious  problem.  The  IPCC  studies  released  in
1995 and 2001 had found no evidence of a global warming–hurricane link,
and there was no new analysis to suggest otherwise.

this  subject  at 

Christopher  Landsea,  an  expert  on 

the  Atlantic
Oceanographic  and  Meteorological  Laboratory,  was  astounded  and
perplexed  when  he  was  informed  that  the  press  conference  was  to  take
place.  As  a  contributing  author  to  both  of  the  previous  reports  and  an
invited  author  for  the  2007  AR4  report,  he  believed  there  must  be  some
huge mistake. He had not done any work to substantiate the claim. Nobody
had.  There  were  no  studies  that  revealed  an  upward  trend  of  hurricane
frequency or intensity. Not in the Atlantic basin or in any other basin.47

Landsea  wrote  to  top  IPCC  officials,  imploring,  “What  scientific,
refereed  publications  substantiate  these  pronouncements?  What  studies
being  alluded  to  have  shown  a  connection  between  observed  warming
trends  on  Earth  and  long-term  trends  of  tropical  cyclone  activity?”
Receiving  no  replies,  he  then  requested  the  IPCC  leadership’s  assurance
that  the  2007  report  would  present  true  science,  saying,  “[Dr.  Trenberth]
seems  to  have  come  to  a  conclusion  that  global  warming  has  altered
hurricane activity, and has already stated so. This does not reflect consensus
within the hurricane research community … Thus, I would like assurance
that what will be included in the IPCC report will reflect the best available
information consensus within the scientific community most expert on the
specific topic.”48

After the assurance didn’t come, he resigned from the 2007 AR4 report
activities  and  issued  an  open  letter  presenting  his  reasons.  And  while  the
IPCC press conference proclaiming that global warming caused hurricanes
received tumultuous responses in the world press, Mother Nature didn’t pay
much  attention.  Hurricane  seasons  since  then  have  returned  to  average
patterns noted historically over the past 150 years.

Feverish Concerns, Cold Sweats

 

Potentially  scary  global  warming  predictions  originate  from  other
sources besides the IPCC. For example, a really good one came from the
US Pentagon, a place that has to worry about a lot of frightening scenarios.
This one concerns a hypothesis that global warming could cause parts of the
world to become colder, a problem for some who like it hot.

It  seems  that  the  Pentagon,  which  had  been  studying  possible  national
security issues associated with climate change for many years, contracted
with a US think tank called Global Business Network to research potential
global  warming  consequences.  The  resulting  research  report  titled  “An
Abrupt  Climate  Change  Scenario  and  Its  Implications  for  United  States
National  Security,”  which  was  released  in  October  2003,  produced  more
than most Pentagon officials expected.

Andrew Marshall, director of the Pentagon’s Office of Net Assessment
(which is responsible for identifying long-term threats to the United States),
was  not  pleased  with  then-President  George  W.  Bush’s  lack  of  anxiety
regarding global warming. Through a decision to bypass the White House,
he presented the summary information and voiced his concerns to Fortune
magazine, which published an article on the subject on February 9, 2004. In
that  article,  Mr.  Marshall  explained  how  melting  at  the  North  and  South
Poles, and from glaciers around the world, presented an impending global
weather disaster.49

Briefly summarized, the theory entails the following scenario, which was
prominently featured in An Inconvenient Truth—both the documentary and
the book— in the discussion involving “thermohaline convection.”

The  Gulf  Stream,  or  “North  Atlantic  thermohaline  conveyor,”  is  a
roughly figure eight–shaped stream of water that transfers heat from south
of  the  equator  as  it  flows  over  the  ocean  surface  toward  the  north  and
warms northern parts of America and Western Europe. It is a primary force
in driving the world’s weather patterns. After the Gulf Stream transfers heat
to the air through convection and cools down, it drops to the bottom of the
ocean and returns as an underwater river that flows back toward the equator,
warms  again,  rises  to  the  surface,  and  returns  north  again,  like  a  huge
thermal conveyor.

The  motor  that  drives  the  conveyor  to  keep  the  water  moving  is
purported by the theory to be located in the north, where the ocean’s salt
density  causes  the  Gulf  Stream  to  drop,  pulling  warm  water  up  from  the
south.  But  if  the  poles  were  to  melt,  large  amounts  of  added  fresh  water

might excessively dilute the Atlantic Ocean’s salt density, causing the Gulf
Stream not to drop as far, and also (in theory) causing it to slow down. This
would  cause  less  warmth  to  be  transferred  to  the  North  Atlantic  region,
affecting  the  climate-heat  balance-driven  weather  patterns.  Northern  parts
of Western Europe would be particularly affected due to prevailing winds
that  move  heat  in  that  direction,  possibly  producing  another  interglacial
cold spell like the LIA.

This scenario is extremely unlikely to happen for several reasons. First of
all, the Gulf Stream disruption theory is based upon different circumstances
that  occurred  about  12,500  years  ago  during  the  Younger  Dryas  episode,
when a giant ice dam burst in North America, causing two enormous lakes
to drain rapidly into the sea. The previous Ice Age had created an ice sheet
up  to  9,000  feet  thick  over  large  northern  regions  of  Europe  and  North
America.  For  example,  the  Laurentide  Ice  Sheet  extended  over  all  of  the
Great Lakes, west into Iowa, and south into Indiana and Ohio. When the ice
melted,  more  than  100,000  cubic  kilometers  of  freshwater  were  rapidly
discharged into the sea, and the Gulf Stream really was overwhelmed. This
can  be  compared  with  freshwater  injections  from  recent  Greenland  ice
melts  amounting  to  only  a  few  hundred  kilometers  per  year,  which  show
signs of stabilizing, at least currently. Since the trillions of tons of ice that
existed prior to our interglacial period melted more than 10,000 years ago,
there simply isn’t enough left to trigger a repeat performance.50

There  is  also  no  evidence  that  recent  warming  is  slowing  the  Gulf
Stream, and the thermohaline conveyor is actually observed to be producing
increased flow rates of deep Atlantic currents. Thermohaline circulation is
now believed to be primarily a wind-driven system energized by the Earth’s
spin and lunar tides, rather than by Gulf Stream salinity differences and sea
temperatures.

Global circulation models based upon real-world data also don’t indicate
any  danger.  A 
the  Lamont-Doherty  Earth
Observatory ran several versions of the Gulf Stream Collapse Theory on a
global climate model at NASA’s GISS and found no evidence of a “tipping
point” that would produce a Gulf Stream shutdown.51

team  of  researchers  at 

While  the  National  Research  Council’s  Committee  on  Abrupt  Climate
Change  previously  warned  about  “large  abrupt  climate  changes”  of  “as
much  as  10°C  (50°F)  in  10  years,”  which  were  claimed  to  be  “not  only
possible but likely in the future,”52 the Lamont-Doherty team found no basis

for  such  dramatic  thresholds  in  their  model  runs.  Instead,  they  concluded
that  the  Atlantic  conveyor  “decreases  linearly  with  the  volume  of
freshwater  added  through  the  St.  Lawrence”  and  that  it  does  so  “without
any threshold effects.”53

Another  team,  at  the  UK’s  Hadley  Centre  for  Climate  Change,  used  a
different model to test the same hypothesis regarding a meltwater shutdown
of the ocean’s circulation, and they found just the opposite: “Accompanying
the freshening trend, the [thermohaline circulation] unexpectedly shows an
upward trend, rather than a downward trend.” This agrees with real-world
evidence  that  deep  ocean  currents  are  becoming  stronger  with  increased
warming and precipitation.54

Rain Forest Rebuttal

 

An  ultimately  embarrassing  assertion  in  the  IPCC’s  2007  AR4  report
was  that  40  percent  of  the  Amazon  rain  forest  in  South  America  is
endangered by global warming Those  findings  were  based  upon  numbers
taken from a non-peer-reviewed paper written by a freelance green activist
journalist  and  published  by  the  WWF.  The  paper  warned  that  “up  to  40
percent  of  the  Amazon  forests  could  react  drastically  to  even  a  slight
reduction  of  precipitation  …  It  is  more  probable  that  forests  will  be
replaced by ecosystems … such as tropical savannas.” The disaster would
be  triggered,  according  to  the  IPCC’s  assessment,  by  a  slight  drop  in  the
rainfall rates expected for a warming world.

The  original  claim  was  based  upon  a  WWF  study,  “Global  Review  of
Forest  Fires,”  written  “to  secure  essential  policy  reform  at  national  and
international  levels  to  provide  a  legislative  and  economic  base  for
controlling harmful anthropogenic forest fires.” The 40 percent figure was
taken from a letter published in the journal Nature, which related to harmful
logging activities.55

Although  the  global  warming–rain  forest  endangerment  connection  has
been debunked by serious scientists, the IPCC has yet to retract or amend
the  claim.  NASA-funded  analyses  of  satellite  imagery  over  past  decades
indicate  that  in  fact  the  rain  forests  are  remarkably  resilient  to  droughts.
Even  during  a  100-year  dry-season  peak  in  2007,  the  jungles  appeared
basically unaffected. Arindam Samanta of Boston University, lead author of

a  recent  study  based  on  satellite  data  from  NASA’s  Moderate  Resolution
Imaging  Spectroradiometer,  or  MODIS,  remarked,  “We  found  no  big
differences in the greenness level of these forests between drought and non-
drought  years.”  Sangram  Ganguly,  author  of  another  study  at  the  NASA-
affiliated Bay Area Environmental Research Institute, added, “Our results
certainly do not indicate such extreme sensitivity to reductions in rainfall.”56

Following Earth’s Runaway Twin

 

One of the best ways to cause man-made greenhouse warming theory
believers’  knees  to  tremble  is  to  assert  that  the  world  is  at  the  cusp  of  a
“tipping  point.”  As  the  Worldwatch  Institute’s  “State  of  the  World  2009”
report defines that term, it is when “climate change begins to feed on itself
and  becomes  essentially  irreversible  for  centuries  into  the  future.”57  A
“really-bad-case” scenario suggests that this can lead to conditions similar
to those on our “sister planet,” Venus.

As  reported  by  Mark  Bullock  at  the  Laboratory  for  Atmospheric  and
Space  Physics  at  University  of  Colorado–Boulder,  in  a  1999  Scientific
American  article,  “Since  Venus  and  Earth  have  a  number  of  similarities,
there are implications here for our own future.”58 Venus is Earth’s twin in
the sense that it’s made up of a similar composition, and it is believed to
once have had a similar atmosphere. But when it comes to current climate,
it couldn’t be much more different. Venus is the hottest planet in the solar
system,  with  an  average  temperature  of  more  than  400  and  a  surface
pressure  nearly  one  hundred  times  greater  than  Earth’s.  And  while  both
planets have clouds, those on Venus contain sulfuric acid and CO
.Venus is
slightly smaller than Earth, is closer to the Sun, and has no plate tectonics.
Its continents simply tip up every 500 million years or so like the lid on a
boiling pot and slide down into a molten core, spewing huge amounts of
heat into the atmosphere as they do so. That is a real tipping point!

At  some  point  in  Venus’s  past,  its  global  magnetosphere  shut  down.
Without this force field the Sun’s solar wind was able to reach the planet
and  tear  away  at  its  atmosphere,  stripping  away  the  lighter  atoms.  The
lightest  atom  is  hydrogen,  a  constituent  of  water,  which  is  a  major
component of Earth’s atmosphere (and GHG).59

2

Another really big difference between the two planets—one that accounts
for  substantially  different  climate  features—is  that  Venus  doesn’t  rapidly
rotate on its axis, creating short day/night cycles as Earth does. In fact, a
Venusian day is slightly longer than a Venusian year. This means that the
same  surface  area  is  exposed  to  radiant  solar  heat  without  relief  for  very
long  periods  of  time.  And  according  to  our  best  reports,  there  are  no
sunbathing  humans  to  enjoy  these  conditions  or  thus  contribute  to
greenhouse emissions. So don’t sweat sibling relationships!

Also, according to MIT scientist Richard Lindzen, “There is no physical
basis for suggesting ‘tipping points’ … especially given that the impact of
each added

amount  of  CO

  [in  the  atmosphere]  is  less  than  the  impact  of  its

predecessor (i.e., “we have diminishing returns) “60.

2

Convenient Illusions

 

Al  Gore  has  represented  himself  as  a  learned  authority  on  the
mechanisms  and  threats  of  a  global  warning  crisis.  And  if  drama  trumps
real facts in his pronouncements, doubts regarding his convictions may be
unwarranted. Still, as someone who frequently quotes a wise observation by
Mark  Twain,  a  person  he  greatly  admires,  Mr.  Gore  might  carefully
consider that advice: “It ain’t what you don’t know that gets you in trouble.
It’s what you know for sure that just ain’t so.”

Another reported “hero” Gore has credited as an important influence is
his  former  Harvard  professor  Dr.  Roger  Revelle,  a  distinguished
oceanographer.  Dr.  Revelle,  however,  has  expressly  disagreed  with
frightening  global  warming  scenarios  that  Mr.  Gore  has  promulgated,
saying, “Evidence of global warming does not justify drastic measures so
far,  unless  they  were  justified  by  reasons  having  nothing  to  do  with  the
climate change issue.”61

Gore  obviously  wasn’t  very  happy  about  having  his  previously  touted
authority challenge the urgency and rationale of his mission. He countered
by accusing his former professor of having become senile when he made
those remarks shortly before his fatal heart attack in 1992. Not a very nice
way to treat a hero.

Dr.  Revelle  was  not  alone  in  his  strong  disagreement  with  factually
impaired  “Gore  lore.”  Yet  most  informed  scientists  who  know  better  are
reluctant  to  publicly  speak  out  on  the  matter.  Such  reticence  may  be
attributable to a widespread “emperor’s clothes” syndrome associated with
multiple causes. Some might be hesitant to say anything that would reflect
poorly upon the sanctity of the IPCC, the UN-sanctioned tribunal of truth
endowed  with  the  Nobel  Prize  distinction  it  shares  with  fellow  Nobel
laureate  Al  Gore.  Many  may  also  recognize  that  contradicting  alarmist
statements are not helpful in gaining public support essential to sustain an
exploding climate science industry.62

Lord  Christopher  Monckton,  a  policy  adviser  to  former  prime  minister
Margaret  Thatcher  who  also  participated  at  the  New  York  conference,

However, more and more concerned people are speaking out to correct
scientifically  unsupportable  and  misleading  statements.  For  example,  a
judge  in  London’s  High  Court  ruled  in  October  2007  that  the  film  An
Inconvenient Truth can be shown only in secondary schools if accompanied
by guidance notes for teachers to balance Mr. Gore’s “one-sided” views.63 In
comments  regarding  his  ruling,  Sir  Michael  Burton  pointed  out  that  the
“apocalyptical vision” presented in the film was politically partisan, and not
an impartial analysis of the science of climate change: “It is built around the
charismatic presence of the ex-vice president Al Gore, whose crusade is to
persuade  the  world  of  the  dangers  of  climate  change  caused  by  global
warming . . . It is now common ground that it is not simply a science film—
although it is clear that it is based substantially on scientific research and
opinion—but it is [clearly] a political film.”64

John Coleman, founder of the Weather Channel in 1982, expressed strong
opinions  about  Gore’s  promotions  of  warming  hysteria  and  his  cap-and-
trade  agenda  at  an  International  Conference  on  Climate  Change  that  was
held  in  New  York  March  2–4,  2008.  The  event  was  sponsored  by  the
Heartland Institute and was attended by more than two hundred scientists
from several countries. Coleman told the audience his strategy for exposing
what he called “the fraud of global warming”: “[I] have a feeling this is the
opening. If the lawyers will take the case—sue the people who sell carbon
credits. That includes Al Gore. That lawsuit would get so much publicity, so
much  media  attention.  And  as  the  experts  went  to  the  [media]  stand  to
testify, I feel that could become the vehicle to finally put some light on the
fraud of global warming.”65

agreed with Coleman that the courts are a good avenue through which to
show  real  climate  science.  He  also  expressed  a  belief  that  science  will
eventually  prevail,  and  that  the  “scare”  of  global  warming  will  go  away.
Anthony  Watts,  another  of  the  conference  speakers,  commented,  “I  was
surprised to learn that Al Gore had been offered an opportunity to address
this  conference,  and  his  usual  $200,000  speaking  fee  and  expenses  were
met, but he declined. I also know that invitations went out to NASA GISS
principal scientists Dr. James Hansen and Dr. Gavin Schmidt weeks ago as
evidenced by their write-up of the issue on their blog, RealClimate.org, a
week or so ago.”66

It’s a shame that Mr. Gore was unable to attend the conference when the
weather  was  nice  and  warm.  It  would  have  been  so  much  better  for  his
message  than  the  timing  of  a  global  warming  speech  he  presented  in  the
same city in January 2004, one of the coldest days ever recorded in New
York. But then, you can never be certain about the weather.

Chapter 5

UN POLITICAL SCIENCE LESSONS

International  experts  agree 

globalclimate peril.

that  US  capitalism 

is  causing

As  I  first  mentioned  in  the  introduction,  most  of  what  we  hear
daily about global warming—the really scary stuff that gets media headline
coverage, wins Academy Awards, and earns Nobel Prizes—originates from
reports 
the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Given the IPCC’s tremendous
influence  in  shaping  international  public  opinions,  economic  policies,
environmental  and  energy  legislation,  and  the  political  landscapes  that
determine  huge  science  budget  allocations,  its  background  and  workings
warrant special attention.1

issued  by  a  United  Nations–sponsored  corporation, 

The IPCC’s genesis is linked in large measure to some converging forces
and  events  that  occurred  in  the  US  and  Europe  during  the  late  1980s.
Following the phenomenal growth in environmental movements that began
about a decade earlier, green parties in Europe and private special-interest
groups in the US gained even greater momentum under a global warming
banner. Well-organized lobbying campaigns, backed by large budgets and
voting  blocs,  appealed  to  the  interests  of  prominent  political  figures,  and
leading  captains  of  the  media  were  enlisted  in  the  call  for  action.2  Fund-
raisers and pundits recognized that “saving the planet” sells well, and what
sells even better is the underlying message “pay now or fry.”

Global  warm-mongering  got  a  boost  in  1997  when  Washington,  DC,
group,  Ozone  Action  sent  a  “Scientists’  Statement  on  Global  Climactic
Disruption” to then-President Clinton, which they claimed had been signed
by 2,611 scientists from the US and abroad. The document was offered to
endorse  “conclusive”  evidence  of  man-made  global  warming.3  But
according to Citizens for a Sound Economy, a group that opposed climate
alarmism, only about 10 percent of those signers had experience in fields
associated with climate science. Others included two landscape architects,
ten  psychologists,  a 
trained  Chinese  doctor,  and  a
gynecologist.4

traditionally 

The  UN  has  sponsored  and  organized  a  variety  of  environmental
programs that led up to the IPCC’s creation and activities. One, termed the
Montreal Protocol on Substances That Deplete the Ozone Layer, responded
to  concerns  that  human  activities  were  responsible  for  causing  an  ozone
hole  in  the  stratosphere  over  Antarctica.  The  source  of  the  problem  was
attributed  to  releases  of  chlorofluorocarbons  (CFCs)  used  as  refrigerants,
aerosol  propellants,  and  cleaning  solvents.  The  treaty,  which  took  effect
January 1, 1989, has since undergone seven revisions: 1990 (London); 1991
(Nairobi);  1992  (Copenhagen);  1993  (Bangkok);  1995  (Vienna),  1997
(Montreal);  and  1999  (Beijing).  By  September  2007,  about  two  hundred
countries  agreed  to  eliminate  CFC  use  by  2020;  developing  nations  were
given until 2030. Some critics have argued that richer countries can afford
CFC  substitutes  whereas  poorer  ones  that  cannot  are  realizing  increased
death rates from food-borne illnesses.

In 1988, the UN turned most of its attention to human GHG emissions
when  members  of  two  of  its  organizations—the  World  Meteorological
Organization  (WMO)  and  the  United  Nations  Environment  Programme

(UNEP)—were  assigned  to  establish  the  IPCC.  The  IPCC  panel  is
composed  of  representatives  appointed  by  governments  and  is  led  by
government  “scientists”  who  meet  about  annually  and  whose  role  is  to
control the organization’s structure and procedures. While the governments
are encouraged to appoint people with appropriate expertise, in practice this
may be the exception rather than the rule. Many are primarily bureaucrats,
and few have credentials as climate scientists.5

Roy  Spencer,  in  his  book  The  Great  Global  Warming  Blunder,  reports
that former IPCC chairman and chief environmental scientist in the Clinton-
Gore  administration  Robert  Watson  (1997-2002)  made  it  his  priority  to
regulate CO
 before much of any climate modeling had ever occurred. This
intent  was  expressed  to  Dr.  Spencer  and  his  colleague  John  Christy  soon
after Watson had acted as a key 1987 Montreal Protocol negotiator for CFC
regulations.

2

Why  did  the  UN  establish  the  IPCC?  Was  it  to  objectively  study  and
determine whether there really was a climate change crisis? Did they wish
to  explore  which  ones  among  a  known  variety  of  climate  forcings  were
dominant? Were they curious as to what extent human activities played into
the mix? The answer to those questions is, not very likely.

Or rather, had the UN already determined that recently observed climate
 through excessive
change was dangerous and that human releases of CO
population  growth,  industry,  and  free-market  capitalist  consumption  in
developed countries was responsible? And did the UN wish to gain the lead
role in straightening everything out through global regulation and resource
redistribution? Let’s explore these possibilities.

2

Working the System

 

First, what the public doesn’t generally realize is that the IPCC doesn’t
actually  carry  out  any  original  climate  research,  nor  does  it  even
continuously  monitor  climate-related  data.  Instead,  it  simply  issues
assessments  based  primarily  upon  other  independent  peer-reviewed  and
published scientific and technical literature. At least, that is what the panel
is  supposed  to  do.  Yet  some  of  the  most  influential  conclusions  that  are
summarized in its reports have been neither based upon truly independent
research nor properly vetted through accepted peer-review processes.6

Most  of  the  IPCC’s  actual  work  is  conducted  by  separate  “working
groups”  and  a  “task  force”  that  generally  produce  quite  thorough  and
objective  lengthy  technical  reports.  These  individuals  are  selected  on  the
basis  of  their  special  expertise  to  address  designated  topics.  It  should  be
assumed  that  most  take  these  responsibilities  very  seriously.  Yet  in  the
interest of international parity, and not in the interest of science, each of the
working groups has two cochairs: one from a developing country, and one
from  the  developed  world.  As  might  be  imagined,  this  does  not  reflect  a
balance of the most qualified expertise.

What each of the working group’s reviewers learns goes into a report. If
they aren’t sure what they have learned about an issue, or they can’t agree,
they vote among themselves regarding what they think they are most sure
about, and their levels of confidence. Some voting members may have little
or no real experience in dealing with the particular subjects; they are there
to  ensure  international  representation.  From  the  vantage  point  of  political
correctness, this process may be fair; scientific correctness, however, is an
entirely different matter.

You may have seen references to a “network of thousands of international
scientists”  involved  with  IPCC  studies.  One  such  source  was  Time
magazine’s statement that “thousands of scientists from around the world
contribute  to  IPCC  reports,”  as  represented  by  official  US  government
organizations  such  as  the  Department  of  Energy’s  Pacific  Northwest
National Laboratory.7

How can that many experts be wrong? For starters, let’s begin with that
wildly  exaggerated  number  of  experts.  Dr.  Vincent  Gray  reports  a  far
different circumstance based on his firsthand experience as a reviewer for
the  IPCC’s  2007  AR4  report  “Summary  for  Policymakers”:  “Forget  any
illusion  of  hundreds  of  experts  diligently  poring  over  the  report  and
providing extensive feedback to the editing teams. The true picture is closer
to 65 reviewers for any one chapter, with about half not commenting on any
other chapter and one quarter commenting on just one other.”8

Unfortunately,  very  few  people  ever  read  those  full  reports.  What
happens  to  those  big  compilations  is  that  they  go  through  international
bureaucratic reviews, where political appointees dissect them line by line to
glean the best stuff in support of what IPCC wanted to say in the first place.
These  cherry-picked  items  are  then  assembled  and  spun  into  highly
condensed reports calibrated to get prime-time and front-page attention.9

Political summary editing processes usually progress through a series of
drafts  that  become  increasingly  media  worthy.  For  example,  the  original
text of an April 2000 Third Assessment Report (TAR) draft stated, “There
has  been  a  discernible  human  influence  on  global  climate.”10  This  was
followed by an October version that concluded, “It is likely that increasing
concentrations  of  anthropogenic  greenhouse  gases  have  contributed
significantly to the observed warming over the past 50 years.”11 In the final
official summary, the language was toughened up even more: “Most of the
observed warming over the past 50 years is likely to have been due to the
increase in greenhouse gas contributions.”12

When the UN Environment Programme’s spokesman Tim Higham was
asked by New Scientist about the scientific background for this change, his
answer was honest: “There was no new science, but the scientists wanted to
present a clear and strong message to policymakers.”13

Summary  revisions  also  play  down  or  totally  ignore  findings  that
appointed  IPCC  bureaucrats  don’t  want  the  public  to  consider.  An  earlier
TAR draft stated, “In many developing countries, net economic gains are
projected for mean temperature increases up to roughly 2°C (36°F). Mixed
or neutral net effects are projected in developed countries for temperature
increases in the approximate range of 2°C–3°C (36°F–38°F), and net losses
for  larger  temperature  increases.”14  Because  any  mention  of  net  benefits
from  even  moderate  global  warming  would  have  been  unacceptable,  the
statement in the final summary was changed to “An increase in global mean
temperature of up to a few degrees C would produce a mixture of economic
gains  and  losses  in  developed  countries,  with  economic  losses  for  larger
temperature  increases.”  As  Bjorn  Lomborg  points  out  in  his  book  The
Skeptical  Environmentalist,  this  “political  decision  stopped  IPCC  from
looking  at  the  total  cost-benefit  of  global  warming  and  made  it  focus
instead on how to curb further greenhouse gas emissions.”15

Any  scientific  objectivity  behind  IPCC  summary  reports  is  illusory.
Referring  to  bureaucratic  influence,  Keith  Shine,  a  leading  IPCC  author,
described the editing process as follows: “We produce a draft, and then the
policymakers  go  through  it  line  by  line  and  change  the  way  it’s
presented . . . They don’t change the data, but the way it’s presented. It is
peculiar that they have the final say in what goes into a scientist’s report.”16
And  how  objective  are  the  scientific  editors  who  participate?  Recently
deceased  Stephen  Schneider,  a  prominent  man-made  warming  theory

proponent, served as a lead author of the IPCC Working Group I (1994–
1996) and Working Group II (1997–2001) reports. He was also lead author
for the IPCC “Guidance Paper on Uncertainties” and coauthor of the “Key
Vulnerabilities Cross-Cutting Theme” parts for the 2007 AR4 report. The
Stanford University professor obviously became a global warming convert
sometime  after  he  had  written  The  Genesis  Strategy  (published  in  1976),
which  addressed  global  cooling  risks.  In  a  1989  Discover  magazine
interview,  he  candidly  expresses  a  professional-versus-personal  conflict
between  the  side  of  a  scientist  concerned  with  seeking  truth  and  the  side
concerned  with  being  a  citizen  who  must  take  an  interest  in  political
efficacy.

On  the  one  hand,  as  scientists  we  are  ethically  bound  to  the
scientific  method.  On  the  other  hand,  we  are  not  just  scientists,  but
human  beings  as  well.  And  like  most  people,  we’d  like  to  see  the
world a better place, which in this context translates into our working
to reduce the risk of potentially disastrous climatic change. To do that
we  need  to  get  some  broad-based  support,  to  capture  the  public’s
imagination. That, of course, entails getting loads of media coverage.
So  we  have  to  offer  up  scary  scenarios,  make  simplified,  dramatic
statements, and make little mention of any doubts we might have.17

In other words, trust not what we tell you, but believe that we have your
best  interests  in  mind  because  our  personal  intentions  are  ethical.  Accept
what  we  tell  you  for  that  reason.  If  we  have  to  exaggerate  the  truth  and
frighten you to get your attention, it’s for a righteous cause.

The Confidence Game

 

To  lend  scientific  authority,  IPCC  summary  reports  must  above  all
sound confident. Global forecasts tell us within a comically precise decimal
point range that this or that is “virtually certain,” “very likely,” or “likely”
to occur within such and such a time. If we should happen to remember that
past  predictions  have  been  wrong  or  significantly  revised,  the  IPCC
reassures us that climate models are better now. They are confident about
that, and we should be too!

Which might lead us to ask, better than what? If these models are still
wrong,  how  wrong  must  they  be  to  qualify  as  totally  misleading  and
useless?

Climate  models  contain  huge  uncertainty  factors  that  are  broadly
recognized  by  IPCC  scientists.  They  don’t  (can’t)  incorporate  important
unknown  and  poorly  understood  variables  and  relationships,  and  the
parameters  can  be  adjusted  (“tuned”)  to  fit  almost  any  climate,  including
one with no warming or one that cools. Despite the fact that no model has
yet  successfully  predicted  any  future  climate  sequence,  IPCC  summaries
confidently present “projections” looking forward hundreds of years based
upon creative storylines and untested theories. Those theories are primarily
directed 
to  anthropogenic  greenhouse  forcing  factors  and  warming
consequences. Other possible causes and effects are virtually ignored. Yet,
although  the  IPCC  has  provided  an  abundance  of  information  about
atmospheric GHG concentrations and changes, no evidence of past or future
harmful  effects,  or  relationships  to  “unusual”  weather,  has  yet  been
produced.18

Science researcher Roy Spencer observes that “what scientists claim to
know about man-made global warming is based as much upon faith as it is
upon  knowledge.”  He  regards  probabilistic  language  applied  in  IPCC
summary reports as misleading and inappropriate, stating that “its use is a
pseudoscientific  way  of  conveying  the  level  of  faith  a  scientist  has  in
his/her beliefs.”19

Chapter  8  of  the  2000  IPCC  TAR  report,  titled  “Model  Evaluation,”
contains this confession: “We fully recognize that many of the evaluation
statements we make contain a degree of subjective scientific perception and
may contain much ‘community’ or ‘personal’ knowledge. For example, the
very  choice  of  model  variables  and  model  processes  that  are  investigated
are  often  based  upon  the  subjective  judgment  and  experience  of  the
modeling community.”20

In  that  same  report,  the  IPCC  further  admits,  “In  climate  research  and
modeling,  we  should  recognize  that  we  are  dealing  with  a  coupled  non-
linear chaotic system, and therefore that the long-term prediction of future
climate states is not possible.”21 Here, the IPCC openly acknowledges that
its models are not accurate. Yet it obviously needs to apply them to justify
its  ever-growing  budget  and  influence.  Without  unreliable  data  from  the
models, the IPCC might be out of business.

Politics: The Ultimate Scientific Authority

 

As confirmed by evidence exposed in the purloined CRU e-mail files,
scientists with contrary views regarding anthropogenic greenhouse warming
or the efficacy of present-day climate models aren’t likely to be prominently
represented in IPCC processes or summary reports. Prior to release, drafts
are circulated to “expert reviewers” throughout the world for comment, and
unwelcome statements are deleted. Statements that are not consistent with
the views of designated main authors stand little chance of being seriously
considered. The first 1990 report, which was particularly influential as the
basis  for  negotiating  the  United  Nations’  FCCC  (the  Kyoto  Protocol),
included the following statement: “Whilst every attempt was made by the
lead authors to incorporate their comments, in some cases those formed a
minority opinion which could not be reconciled with the larger consensus.”22
In  the  IPCC’s  1995  Second  Assessment  Report  (SAR),  the  crucial
Chapter  8  of  the  final  draft  denied  any  evidence  connecting  observed
climate  changes  to  anthropogenic  greenhouse  causes  (the  “fingerprint”
factor). In fact, Figure 8.10b of that report showed the pattern correlation of
measured  observations  and  climate  models  actually  decreasing  during  a
major  surface  warming  surge  between  1916  and  1940.  The  consulting
scientists approved the draft, along with the full report, in December 1995.23
Its conclusions, based upon reviews of 130 peer-reviewed science studies,
were these:

•  ”None of the studies cited above has shown clear evidence that we
can attribute the observed [climate] changes to the specific cause of
increases in greenhouse gases.”

•    ”While  some  of  the  pattern-based  studies  discussed  here  have
claimed detection of a significant climate change, no study to date
has positively attributed all or part [of the climate change observed]
to [man-made] causes. Nor has any study quantified the magnitude
of a greenhouse gas effect in the observed data—an issue of primary
relevance to policy makers.”

•    ”Any  claims  of  positive  detection  and  attribution  of  significant
climate change are likely to remain controversial until uncertainties
in the total natural variability of the climate system are reduced.”

•    ”While  none  of  these  studies  has  specifically  considered  the
attribution issue, they often draw some attribution conclusions, for
which there is little justification.”

•  ”When will an anthropogenic effect on climate be identified? It is
not surprising that the best answer to this question is, ‘We do not
know.’”24

This all was to change. Sir John Houghton, chairman of Working Group
I, received a letter from the US State Department dated November 15, 1995,
and signed by then–Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary Day Olin Mount. He
reported  to  Undersecretary  of  State  for  Global  Affairs  Timothy  Wirth,  a
former senator (D-CO), close political ally of then-Vice President Gore and
ardent believer in man-made global warming. The letter said, “It is essential
that the chapters not be finalized prior to the completion of the discussions
at the IPCC Working Group I Plenary in Madrid, and that chapter authors
be prevailed upon to modify their text in an appropriate manner following
the discussion in Madrid.”25

The following year, Mount was appointed by President Bill Clinton to the
prestigious position of Ambassador to Iceland. Wirth was appointed to head
the United Nations Foundation. Both knew on which side their toast was
buttered.

The  Madrid  Plenary,  which  took  place  in  November,  was  a  political
meeting  involving  appointed  representatives  from  ninety-six  nations  and
fourteen  nongovernmental  organizations  (NGOs).  Participants  went  over
the “accepted” Chapter 8 text, line by line. That chapter, which should have
governed  the  entire  IPCC  report,  was  then  substantially  rewritten  to
advance a global warming campaign being waged by the UN, the NGOs,
and the White House.

In  May  1996,  after  the  report  was  released,  the  Chapter  8  conclusions
were startlingly different from the scientists’ accepted version. The Chapter
8 lead author, Ben Santer, from the US government’s Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory, had excised denials of any scientific evidence of man-
made warming, replacing them with statements asserting just the opposite:
“The  body  of  statistical  evidence  in  Chapter  8,  when  examined  in  the
context of our physical understanding of the climate system, now points to a
discernible human influence on the global climate.”26

Mr.  Santer’s  changes  appeared  to  be  based  primarily  upon  two
unpublished  papers  he  himself  had  submitted,  which  had  not  been  peer-
reviewed at the time. However, a published paper he coauthored at about
the same time contradicted his Chapter 8 IPCC report insertions. That paper
concludes  that  different  estimates  of  three  natural  climate  variability
influences are inconsistent, and until that question is resolved, “it will be
hard to say, with confidence, that an anthropogenic climate signal has or has
not  been  detected.”  That,  in  fact,  is  very  much  in  line  with  the  original
Chapter 8 science conclusions.27

But  that’s  not  what  most  people  remember.  The  “discernible  human
influence” insertion, which reversed the entire IPCC climate science report,
purportedly ended all debate on this matter, providing an official foundation
for the UN-sponsored Kyoto Protocol to follow in 1997.28

The  revision  epitomizes  the  reality  of  political  intrusions  into  science.
The Wall Street Journal condemned the 1995 SAR revision in a July 1996
editorial, “Coverup in the Greenhouse.”29 The journal Nature, which unlike
the Wall Street Journal tended to favor a Kyoto Protocol rebuffed the IPCC
for  rewriting  Chapter  8  to  “ensure  that  it  conformed”  with  political
correctness. Former National Academy of Sciences president Dr. Frederick
Seitz  detailed  his  objections  to  the  illegitimate  rewrite  in  a  Wall  Street
Journal article titled “A Major Deception on Global Warming” on June 12,
1996.30

Challenging Processes

 

The  IPCC’s  activities  concentrate  on  tasks  assigned  by  the  WMO’s
Executive  Council  and  the  UNEP’s  Governing  Council  resolutions  and
decisions, along with priorities that support the UN Framework Convention
on  Climate  Change  process  guidelines.  Prominent  critics  have  called  into
question  both  those  activities  and  those  priorities.  As  noted  by  Dr.  Fred
Singer in the foreword of this book, one of these critics is Dr. Seitz, who
publicly denounced the SAR report, stating, “I have never witnessed a more
disturbing corruption of the peer-review process than the events that led to
this IPCC report.”31

Referring to the third report (TAR), Sir John Maddox, a former editor of
the journal Nature, observed, “The IPCC is monolithic and complacent, and

A  study  conducted  by  the  National  Center  for  Policy  Analysis,  a
nonprofit,  nonpartisan  policy  research  organization,  determined  that  the
IPCC’s  2007  AR4  report  clearly  violated  60  of  127  principles  associated
with sound forecasting methods, and only really followed 17 of those. As
reported by H. Sterling Burnett, author of the Washington Times story that
reported the study, “A good example of a principle clearly violated is ‘Make
sure forecasts are independent of politics’ … Politics shapes the IPCC from
beginning  to  end.  Legislators,  policymakers  and/or  diplomatic  appointees
select (or approve) the scientists—at least the lead scientists— who make
up  the  IPCC.  In  addition,  the  summary  and  the  final  draft  of  the  IPCC’s
Fourth  Assessment  Report  was  written  in  collaboration  with  political
appointees and [is] subject to their approval.”34

Commenting upon observations by Kesten Green and J. Scott Armstrong,
who  conducted  the  IPCC  audit,  Burnett  said,  “Sadly,  Mr.  Green  and  Mr.
Armstrong  found  no  evidence  that  the  IPCC  was  even  aware  of  the  vast
literature  on  scientific  forecasting  methods,  much  less  applied  the
principles.”35

it is conceivable that they are exaggerating the speed of [climate] change.”32
The UK House of Lords’ “Scientific and Economic Analysis Report” on
the IPCC for the G-8 Summit, July 2005, stated, “We have some concerns
about  the  objectivity  of  the  IPCC  process,  with  some  of  its  emissions
scenarios  and  summary  documentation  apparently  influenced  by  political
considerations.”33

Edward J. Wegman, a George Mason University professor who chaired
the  panel  of  audit  investigators,  concluded  that  based  upon  the  IPCC’s
flawed  statistical  analyses  and  procedures,  the  idea  that  the  planet  is
experiencing  unprecedented  warming  “cannot  be  supported.”  He  warned
that  policy  makers  should  take  this  into  account  before  enacting  laws  to
counter global warming that would have severe economic consequences.36

Some of the East Anglia CRU e-mails confirm pressures to provide clear
and  politically  compelling  IPCC  report  conclusions,  whether  or  not  they
were  supportable  by  solid  science.  Keith  Briffa  commented  in  one
exchange, “I know there is pressure to present a nice tidy story as regards
apparent unprecedented warming in a thousand years or more.” In another
he stated, “In reality the situation is not quite so simple” (based upon tree
ring research involving the illegitimate hockey stick charts he coproduced
with Michael Mann).37

In  September  2000,  Fillipo  Giorgi  of  the  International  Centre  for
Theoretical  Physics  in  Trieste,  Italy,  wrote  an  e-mail  stating  that  he  felt
pressure to cite model simulations that hadn’t yet been peer-reviewed. He
worried  that  this  demonstrated  an  unacceptable  relaxation  of  scientific
standards in which the IPCC rules “have been softened to the point that in
this  way  the  IPCC  is  not  any  more  an  assessment  of  published  science
which is not its proclaimed goal.” He added: “At this point there are very
little  rules  and  almost  anything  goes.  I  think  this  will  set  a  dangerous
precedent.”38

Roger  Pielke,  a  University  of  Colorado  political  science  professor,
believes that many IPCC participants want to compel action instead of “just
summarize science.”39 Andrew Weaver, a senior Canadian climate scientist
at the University of Victoria, agrees that IPCC leadership has allowed the
panel  to  advocate  for  action  on  global  warming  rather  than  serve  as  a
neutral science advisory body.

In  a  January  2010  interview  with  the  Canwest  News  Service,  Weaver
echoed published sentiments of other top climate scientists in the US and
Europe:  “There’s  been  some  dangerous  crossing  of  the  line.  Some  might
argue we need a change in some of the upper leadership of the IPCC, who
are  perceived  as  becoming  advocates.  I  think  that  is  a  very  legitimate
question.”40

Weaver  specifically  urged  that  IPCC’s  chairman,  Rajendra  Pachauri,
should  resign  and  that  other  officials  should  cease  being  “overly
enthusiastic”  in  pushing  policy  changes.  Even  the  activist  organization
Greenpeace  has  joined  a  push  for  Pachauri’s  ousting  to  benefit  IPCC
credibility. Greenpeace director John Sauven argued that “we need someone
held in high regard who has extremely good judgment and is seen by the
global public as someone on their side.”41

The  InterAcademy  Council,  an  Amsterdam-based  association  of  the
world’s  leading  academic  national  science  academies,  agreed  that  a
“fundamental  reform”  of  IPCC’s  management  structure  is  needed.  In  a
report released on August 30, 2010 following a review of IPCC practices
and  methodologies  leading  to  their  2007  report,  the  Council  found  two
types of errors. Its chairman, Harold T. Shapiro, stated that, “One is the kind
where  they  place  high  confidence  in  something  where  there  is  little
evidence. The other is the kind where you make a statement . . . with no
substantive  value.”  The  Council  also  found  the  IPCC  guilty  of  making  a

fraudulent claim that the Himalayan glaciers will be gone by 2035, stating
that, “IPCC was not paying close enough attention to what reviewers said
about this example.”42

There are also those who point to some apparent conflicts of interest on
the part of the IPCC’s chairman. Since Dr. Pachauri took control of the Tata
Energy Research Institute (TERI) in the 1980s, that large Indian company
has  vastly  extended  its  interests  in  virtually  every  kind  of  renewable  and
sustainable  energy  technology.  For  example,  its  Tata  Group  has  invested
$1.5 billion in a huge wind farm project. Another project, cofinanced by the
UK Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and the German
Insurance  firm  Munich  Re,  is  studying  how  India’s  insurance  industry,
including Tata, can benefit from exploiting the supposed risks of exposure
to climate change.43

Some believe that Pachauri’s obstinate refusal to quit despite the heavy
weight of condemnation by even his own panel members may be having an
effect upon his mental stability. Responding to critics in a Financial Times
interview, he characterized global warming skeptics as “people who say that
asbestos is as good as talcum powder.” He also expressed hope that such
people would “apply it to their faces every day.”44

Ross McKitrick, who challenged and exposed the now-infamous hockey
stick  temperature  data,  believes  that  the  IPCC’s  scientific  failings  and  its
willingness to cross the line into advocacy will eventually percolate into the
public policy arena. He claims, “The halo has come off of the IPCC. At the
time of the 2007 report, there were very few politicians willing to question
statements from the IPCC. Now, as this plays out, people will start to be
embarrassed to cite the IPCC.”45

The Big Heist: Political Hijacking of Science

 

In essence, then, we’ve seen that the IPCC, the primary source of much
of what we hear about global warming, is not a scientific body. It is a UN-
sponsored  political  advocacy  mouthpiece  for  its  own  special  interests.  It
does  not  conduct  science;  it  conducts  politics.  It  performs  or  supports  no
original  research.  Rather,  it  invites  and  appoints  people  who  do  research,
along with others who don’t, to review reports that agree with fixed views
and agendas—and to ignore or even block findings that do not.

The global warming rubric has served as an ideal platform to enable the
UN to advance large philosophical visions, wealth distribution agendas, and
world  governance  goals  under  a  banner  of  global  environmentalism.
Dangerous  climate  change  and  attributing  its  cause  to  human  activities
serve  as  pretenses  for  a  much  broader  global  environmentalism  doctrine
aimed at defeating capitalism and free market choices.

If  this  sounds  a  bit  like  conspiratorial  paranoia,  let’s  review  the  words
spoken  by  then-President  Jacques  Chirac  of  France  in  a  2000  speech
supporting a key Western European Kyoto Protocol objective: “For the first
time,  humanity  is  instituting  a  genuine  instrument  of  global  governance,
one that should find a place within the World Environmental Organization
which France and the European Union would like to see established.”46

IPCC  Working  Group  II  “Summary  for  Policymakers”  reports  go  far
beyond  science,  offering  prescriptions  for  a  better,  more  equitable
distribution of wealth and resources. They explicitly point out that due to
environmental scarcity, cars and trains should be restricted to lower, more
efficient  top  speeds;  sails  should  be  emphasized  for  ships  to  save  fuel;
biomass should become the primary fuel source; and bicycle use should be
encouraged. Regionalized (smaller) economies should be created to reduce
transportation  demand; 
lifestyles  should  be  reoriented  away  from
consumption; and sharing resources should be emphasized, such as through
co-ownership.  Citizens  should  be  encouraged  to  pursue  free  time  over
wealth,  to  choose  quality  rather  than  quantity,  and  to  “increase  freedom
while containing consumption.” People should resist indoctrination by the
media  to  want  things  that  shape  their  values  and  identities.  The  media
should direct our paths toward a more sustainable world, raising awareness
among media professionals of the need for GHG mitigation and the role of
the media in shaping lifestyles and aspirations to encourage a wider cultural
shift.47

Irresponsible claims within IPCC summary reports have led to legal ones
in the form of junk lawsuits. In one, the plaintiffs asked defendant utility
plants to reduce their CO
 emissions throughout a wide area of the US. The
New  York  Federal  Appellate  Court  ruled  in  September  2009  that  this
regulation-by-judge could go forward even though the EPA is considering
such regulations as well.

In a second case, the plaintiffs alleged that global warming caused by the
 emissions released by fossil fuel–burning utility companies increased

2

CO

2

the ferocity of Hurricane Katrina. The class action suit seeks payment for
all storm area damages, and the Federal Appellate Court in New Orleans
ruled that the case can go forward.

An  Alaskan  Indian  tribe  filed  a  suit  in  San  Francisco  alleging  that  its
village will be destroyed by rising sea levels as glaciers melt due to global
warming. The tribe is seeking reimbursement costs from energy and power
company defendants because of its need to relocate. In this instance the trial
court dismissed the case.48

2

Finally, some US federal and state legislators are beginning to combat the
IPCC’s  scientific  abuses.  Senator  John  Barrasso  (R-WY)  has  called  for
Rajendra  Pachauri  to  resign,  stating  that  “new  scandals”  emerge  “every
day” about the “socalled facts” in the panel’s reports and that “the integrity
of the data and the integrity of the science [have] been compromised . . .
The scientific data behind these policies must be independently verified.”49

Unsurprisingly,  Senator  Inhofe,  the  ranking  member  of  the  Senate
Committee on Environment and Public Works, is joining Senator Barrasso
in calling for an investigation of the IPCC. Senator Inhofe has been a strong
and  vocal  critic  of  climate  fearmongering,  calling  man-made  global
warming “the greatest hoax ever perpetrated on the American people.” Prior
to  the  Climategate  scandal,  he  released  a  committee  report  titled  “More
Than 700 International Scientists Dissent Over Man-made Global Warming
Claims—Scientists Continue to Debunk ‘Consensus’ in 2008 and 2009.”50

Representative Blaine Luetkemeyer (R-MO) has introduced a House bill
that would cut US funding for the IPCC. He characterized the organization
as one “which is nothing more than a group of UN bureaucrats that supports
man-made claims on global warming that many scientists disagree with.”51

Texas  authorities  have  announced  that  the  state  is  taking  legal  action
against the EPA’s efforts to curb GHG emissions under the Clean Air Act.
In its filing, the state argued that the EPA based its decision on IPCC data.

According to the Associated Press, Virginia attorney general Kenneth T.
Cuccinelli  has  asked  the  EPA  to  delay  final  consideration  of  the
endangerment  finding  regarding  CO
  emissions  so  that  “newly  available
information” can be reviewed.52

In total, what has the IPCC’s review of climate change science reports
determined?  It  has  concluded  that  policy  makers  rather  than  the  free
markets should determine our economic desires and lifestyles. Since global
warming—the  basis  for  this  justification—has  no  boundaries,  the  UN

would  be  the  logical  world  seat  of  governance.  There,  politicians  from
around the world can jointly determine what is proper and fair for all of us.
And they received a Nobel prize for this?

Chapter 6

CONTRAILS OVER COPENHAGEN

Earth’s last chance before the next last chance.

The  Copenhagen  Summit  of  2009  was  billed  as  “the  Earth’s  last
chance.”  The  real  agenda,  however,  was  to  pressure  the  US  and  other
industrialized  countries  to  pay  retributions  to  less  fortunate  nations  for
excessive  energy  consumption.  This  was  not  the  first  time  that  an
international forum gathered to promote the cause of global warming. The
buildup to this ultimately hapless event began more than 20 years earlier.

A  period  of  global  cooling  that  ended  in  the  1970s  was  followed  by  a
warming surge. Losing no time, the UN, through its WMO and UNEP, not
only had established by 1988 that the warming was due to a “greenhouse
effect” but also, even more remarkably, had already determined that human
activities were substantially to blame. They pronounced that immediate and
drastic  reductions  were  needed  to  stabilize  conditions.  That  ominous

2

conclusion, in turn, provided the rationale for the UN to sponsor the huge
Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), or Earth Summit,
in  Rio  de  Janeiro  in  June  1992,  where  participating  countries  began  to
negotiate 
“dangerous”
anthropogenic GHGs (principally CO
) at 1990 levels. The original deadline
for accomplishing this was 2000, and 154 nations agreed to sign on.

international 

agreements 

stabilizing 

for 

Yet no scientific data existed to serve as a sound basis for either those
danger  assertions  or  the  UN’s  motivation  to  establish  its  Framework
Convention on Climate Change in 1992, which stated that “human activities
have  been  substantially  increasing  the  atmospheric  concentrations  of
greenhouse  gases,  that  these  increases  enhance  the  natural  greenhouse
effect, and that this will result on average in the additional warming of the
Earth’s  surface  and  atmosphere  and  may  adversely  affect  natural
ecosystems and mankind.”1

No,  there  was  no  scientific  evidence  to  back  up  those  statements  or  to
justify the Kyoto Protocol, which the FCCC spawned to cap CO
 emissions
in developed countries while giving China and India a pass. There wasn’t
any  evidence  to  support  those  assumptions  in  February  2005  when  the
agreement went into force—and there still isn’t today.

2

The Road from Rio: Politics in the Fast Lane

 

Heads of state from dozens of countries that were concerned that global
warming  was  a  real  and  dangerous  threat  to  mankind  attended  the  Earth
Summit. The event, chaired by billionaire Canadian businessman Maurice
Strong, attracted an estimated forty thousand participants. Mr. Strong had
previously  served  as  secretary  general  for  a  1972  UN  Conference  on  the
Human Environment, and in 1992, he was executive director of UNEP. He
later  became  a  key  person  in  bringing  together  the  thousands  of
international bureaucrats, diplomats, and politicians who participated in the
Kyoto Protocol deliberations.

Mr.  Strong  has  an  interesting  and  active  background.  He  and  his  wife,
Hanne,  an  occultist,  had  earlier  established  a  global  headquarters  in  San
Luis Valley, Colorado, for the New Age movement called “Baca,” after a
mystic  informed  them  it  “would  become  the  center  for  a  new  planetary
order which would evolve from the economic collapse and environmental

catastrophes that would sweep the globe in the years to come.” Together,
the  Strongs  created  the  Manitou  Foundation,  which  brought  together
devotees  of  diverse  religious  sects,  both  traditional  and  mystical.  Actress
Shirley MacLaine’s astrologer told her to move there, and she did.2

The  Strongs’  Baca  Grande  ranch  sat  on  one  of  the  North  American
continent’s largest freshwater aquifers, from which Mr. Strong intended to
pipe water to the desert Southwest. The plan was abandoned due to protests
from environmental groups. Strong ended up with a $1.2 million settlement
from the local water company, yet retained rights to the water.

A 2005 inquiry into the corrupt UN “Oil-for-Food” program revealed that
nearly  $1  million  was  funneled  into  a  Strong-owned  family  company
account  by  Iraq  Foreign  Minister  Tariq  Aziz  through  a  North  Korean
contact.  His  purpose  was  to  persuade  the  UN  to  grant  Saddam  Hussein’s
government  certain  exemptions  from  an  export  ban.  Since  Kyoto,  Strong
had acted as a personal intermediary for UN Secretary General Kofi Annan
for  various  missions,  including  contacts  with  North  Korea’s  communist
regime.  He  had  also  maintained  close  friendships  with  top  Chinese
government  leaders  going  back  in  time  to  the  Cultural  Revolution  under
Mao Tse-tung. After his role in the scandal was revealed 8 years later, he
took up residence in a penthouse flat of a building occupied by UN agencies
in the Chinese capital.3

Strong was a major contributor to a 1987 Brundtland Commission report
titled “Our Common Future,” which had been sponsored by the UN’s World
Commission  on  Environment  and  Development.  The  WCED  is  broadly
credited  with  igniting  the  “green  movement”  and  popularizing  the  term
“sustainable  environment.”  Its  purpose  was  to  address  growing  concern
“about the accelerating deterioration of the human environment and natural
resources and the consequences of that deterioration for human and social
development.”

It  is  no  secret  where  Strong  placed  most  of  the  blame  for  that
deterioration.  He  has  complained  that  “the  United  States  is  clearly  the
greatest  risk  to  the  world’s  ecological  health.”  Furthermore,  he  clearly
stated  in  the  UNCED  August  28,  1991,  report:  “It  is  clear  that  current
lifestyles  and  consumption  patterns  of  the  affluent  middle  class  …
involving  high  meat  intake,  consumption  of  large  amounts  of  frozen  and
convenience foods, ownership of motor vehicles, small electric appliances,
home  and  work  place  air-conditioning,  and  suburban  housing  are  not

sustainable  .  .  .  A  shift  is  necessary  toward  lifestyles  less  geared  to
environmentally damaging consumption patterns.”4

Strong wrote the introduction to Beyond Interdependence: The Meshing
of the World’s Economy and the Earth’s Ecology, which was published in
1992  by  the  Trilateral  Commission,  a  private  organization  founded  by
David  Rockefeller,  chairman  of  the  UN  Council  on  Human  Relations  in
1973. In that introduction, Strong boasts, “This book couldn’t appear at a
better time, with the preparation for the Earth Summit moving into gear …
it  will  help  guide  decisions  that  will  literally  determine  the  fate  of  the
Earth . . . Rio will have the political capacity to produce the basic changes
needed  in  our  international  economic  agendas  and  in  our  institutions  of
governance.”5

And Rio later attempted to accomplish just that. Chairman Strong made it
quite clear to the Rio audience that he was an environmentalist at all costs:
“We may get to the point where the only way of saving the world will be for
industrial  civilization  to  collapse.”  This  was  a  Strong  beginning  in  that
direction for certain.

Timothy Wirth, then serving as undersecretary of state for global affairs
in the Clinton-Gore administration, seconded Strong’s statement. He left no
doubt  regarding  his  indifference  toward  protecting  scientific  integrity,
which became evident later in the 1995 SAR rewrite events: “We have got
to ride the global warming issue. Even if the theory of global warming is
wrong, we will be doing the right thing in terms of economic policy and
environmental policy.”6

Also speaking at the Rio conference, Deputy Assistant of State Richard
Benedick,  who  was  then  head  of  the  policy  divisions  of  the  US  State
Department, agreed: “A global warming treaty must be implemented even if
there is no scientific evidence to back the [enhanced] greenhouse effect.”7
Doesn’t that pretty much say it all with regard to agenda?

Wealth of Nations: An Unfair Advantage

 

The  UN’s  central  Kyoto  Protocol  theme,  codified  through  its  Rio
meeting agenda framework, revolved around a “common but differentiated
responsibilities” rationale that has remained eternally clear and constant. In
Rio, all the parties were in agreement about the following:

•    ”The  largest  share  of  historical  and  current  global  emissions  of

greenhouse gases has originated in developed countries.”

•  ”Per capita emissions in developing countries are relatively low [this

was before China and India changed that picture].”

•  ”The share of global emissions originating in developing countries

will grow to meet their social and development needs.”

The  treaty  that  was  negotiated  in  Kyoto,  Japan,  in  December  1997
opened for signature on March 16, 1998, and went into effect on February
16,  2005,  following  ratification  by  Russia  on  November  16,  2004.  As
discussed later, Russia’s decision to sign on had nothing to do with climate
issues. As of April 2008, a total of 178 countries and other governmental
entities had signed on and ratified its terms. Actual compliance, however,
has fallen far short of that number.

The  agreement  placed  virtually  all  responsibility  for  GHG  reductions
upon  “Annex  I”  (industrialized  countries),  particularly  those  among  them
listed as “Annex II” (developed countries)—a subset made up of members
of 
the  UN-sponsored  Organization  for  Economic  Cooperation  and
Development  established  in  1960.  The  Annex  I  signatories  agreed  to  (1)
reduce GHG emissions (particularly CO
) to targets below their respective
1990 levels by 2012 when the Kyoto Treaty expires; (2) purchase emission
credits  from  other  nations;  and  (3)  invest  in  sanctioned  conservation
measures. Annex II ratifiers are required to pay costs to assist developing
(exempt)  countries  in  reducing  emissions.  The  US  and  Australia,  both
prospective  Annex  II  members,  have  refrained  from  ratifying 
the
agreement.8

2

Kyoto Protocol: Annex I and Annex II Categories Industrialized

and Developed Countries

 

°Australia,  *Austria,  Belarus,  Belgium,  Bulgaria,  *Canada,  Croatia,
Czech  Republic,  *Denmark,  Estonia,  *Finland,  *France,*Germany,
*Greece, Hungary, *Iceland, *Ireland, *Italy, *Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, *Luxembourg, Monaco, *Netherlands, *New Zealand, *Norway,
Poland,  *Portugal,  Romania,  Russian  Federation,  Slovakia,  Slovenia,
*Spain,  *Sweden,  *Switzerland,  Turkey,  Ukraine,  *United  Kingdom,
°United States, and separately, the *European Union

Annex I Industrialized Countries
*Annex II Developed Countries (Ratifying)
°Annex II Developed Countries (Non-Ratifying)

Although  it  sounds  very  official,  the  Kyoto  Protocol  agreement  terms
were drafted and approved by a global warming alliance involving NGOs
appointed  by  functionaries  of  the  United  Nations.  Neither  the  UN  nor  its
NGO appointees actually control any people or territories, or are headed by
publicly elected representatives. NGOs are much more prominent in Europe
than they are in this country. For example, the Climate Action Network in
Europe  is  a  group  of  more  than  365  NGOs  funded  by  the  European
Commission along with the Dutch and Belgian governments; the Climate
Action  Network  in  the  United  States  consists  of  about  forty  NGOs.  Still,
such  organizations  collectively  managed  to  mobilize  nearly  twenty
thousand attendees who traveled to Rio for the Earth Summit from all over
the  world.  Most  of  them  actually  attended  a  parallel  “cheerleaders”
conference  (an  NGO  forum  held  nearby),  and  only  about  twenty-four
hundred attended the actual summit as delegates.9

The  Kyoto  Protocol  built  upon  the  success  of  another  UN-sponsored
agreement, the Montreal Protocol of 1989, which focused world attention
on  reducing  manufactured  ozone-depleting  chemicals  (“CFCs”),  which
were  posited  as  causing  an  “ozone  hole”  over  Antarctica  that  had  led  to
higher incidents of skin cancer.10 Since that scare, there now appears to be a
trend  of  recovery  in  the  ozone  layer,  and  the  hole  may  soon  close  more
rapidly than reduced CFC levels would produce. Some research indicates
that this reversal may be caused, or at least assisted by, shifts in atmospheric
wind patterns.11

Green parties in Western European nations have expanded greatly since
the  1970s,  and  they  have  become  an  important  force  within  fragile
government political coalitions. Accordingly, the participation of thousands
of  environmental  activists  at  Rio  captured  great  political  attention  in  the
UK. Primary themes continue to be that cheap energy is the root cause of
technological  abundance  that  has  created  modern  “throw-away”  societies,
and  that  the  answer  is  to  turn  away  from  fossils,  replacing  them  with
cleaner solar and wind alternatives. Organic farming is also emphasized to
avoid  evils  posed  by  artificial  chemicals.  Paul  Ehrlich,  a  prominent
environmental scientist at Stanford University and author of the best-selling

book  The  Population  Bomb  (1968),  clearly  espouses  these  views,  and  he
attributes many of the world’s problems to “too many rich people.”12

The  late  Aaron  Wildavsky,  a  professor  of  political  science  at  the
University  of  California–Berkeley,  identified  a  close  connection  between
the  proclamation  that  global  warming  is  the  mother  of  all  environmental
scares and the ultimate goals of some  green  coalition  activists:  advocacy.
He  said,”Warming  (and  warming  alone),  through  its  primary  antidote  of
withdrawing  carbon  from  production  and  consumption,  is  capable  of
realizing  the  environmentalist’s  dream  of  an  egalitarian  society  based  on
rejection of economic growth in favor of smaller populations eating lower
on the food chain, consuming a lot less, and sharing a much lower level of
resources more equally.”13

Fossils and their CO

 emission progeny then become important targets,
due  to  their  central  connections  to  industrial  growth,  transportation,  and
modern life in general. This thinking also serves the interests of the United
Nations.  Applying  a  convenient  greenhouse  theory,  the  global  warming
scare  provides  an  ideal  way  to  expand  influence  and  power  through  an
ability to impose de facto rationing of scarce and vital resources.14

Of course, this is intended for the public good. As the FCCC’s Article 2
states, the objective is to “achieve stabilization of GHG concentrations in
the  atmosphere  at  a  level  that  would  prevent  dangerous  anthropogenic
interference with the climate system.” Yet nowhere in either the FCCC or
the Kyoto Protocol is it ever clarified what GHG levels are “dangerous,”
either  to  humans  or  to  the  ecosystems,  or  how  the  danger  claim  is  truly
justifiable.15

2

The US Senate Sends a Message: No Way!

 

The  US  Senate  recognized  that  proposed  Kyoto  Protocol  regulations
would  bring  disastrous  consequences  to  America’s  economy  and  took
action  to  kill  that  threat.  In  a  rare  spirit  of  solidarity,  the  Senate
unanimously passed (95-0) the bipartisan Byrd-Hagle US Senate Resolution
(S  Res  98),  which  made  it  clear  that  the  United  States  would  not  be  a
signatory  to  any  agreement  that  “would  result  in  serious  harm  to  the
economy  of  the  United  States.”  The  Senate  was  particularly  antagonistic

toward any agreement that didn’t include binding targets and timetables for
both developing and industrialized nations.

Then-President  Bill  Clinton,  no  stranger  to  political  pragmatism,
immediately got the message and never submitted a US approval request for
congressional  ratification.  You  can  bet  that  his  vice  president,  who  had
participated  in  Kyoto  Protocol  negotiations  on  behalf  of  Clinton’s
administration in 1997, wasn’t one bit happy about these developments.

Al  Gore  was  gearing  up  for  his  ultimately  unsuccessful  run  for  the
presidency in 2000, featuring environmental priorities as a big pitch point.
Then,  as  now,  he  promoted  global  warming  as  a  threat  to  humanity,
hawking cap-and-trade legislation as the road to salvation. The US Senate
rebuff of Kyoto, along with Gore’s own administration’s unwillingness to
pursue  ratification,  was  an  obvious  and  embarrassing  setback.  Yet  in
subsequent speeches, Gore never seems to clarify those real circumstances
during  his  global  publicity  forays,  suggesting  instead  that  Kyoto  was
“Bushwacked.” Perhaps he counts on the likelihood that his audiences are
too young to know differently, too old and senile to remember, or just too
indifferent to have been paying attention. In any case, the political tide—if
not the polar seas—had truly risen, and for a time had turned against him.

On June 11, 2001, a few months after taking office, President George W.
Bush  commented  publicly  regarding  his  views  of  the  Kyoto  Protocol,
calling  it  “fatally  flawed  in  fundamental  ways.”  He  reported  that  his
cabinet-level  Working  Group  on  Global  Warming  had  “asked  the  highly
respected National Academy of Sciences to provide us with the most up-to-
date information [on] what is known about and what is not known about the
science of climate change.”16  He  then  summarized  the  conclusions  of  that
working group:

•  ”First, we know the surface temperature of the Earth is warming. It
has  risen  by  0.6°C  [1.08°F]  over  the  past  100  years.  There  was  a
warming trend from the 1890s to the 1940s; cooling from the 1940s
to the 1970s; and then sharply rising temperatures from the 1970s to
today.”

•  ”There is a natural greenhouse effect that contributes to warming . . .
Concentrations of greenhouse gases, especially CO
, have increased
substantially since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution. And

2

the  NAS  indicates  that  the  increase  is  due  in  large  part  to  human
activity.”

•  ”Yet the Academy’s report tells us that we do not know how much
effect natural fluctuations in climate may have had on warming. We
do  not  know  how  much  our  climate  could  or  will  change  in  the
future.  We  do  not  know  how  fast  change  will  occur,  or  even  how
some of our actions could impact it. For example, our useful efforts
to  reduce  sulfur  emissions  may  have  actually  increased  warming
because  sulfate  particles  reflect  sunlight,  bouncing  it  back  into
space.  And,  finally  no  one  can  say  with  any  certainty  what
constitutes a dangerous level of warming, and therefore what level
must  be  avoided.  The  policy  challenge  is  to  act  in  a  serious  and
sensible way, given the limits of our knowledge.”17

From  the  beginning,  prominent  US  scientists  and  economists  have
opposed the Kyoto Protocol provisions. Some of those critics are from Al
Gore’s alma mater; a strongly critical review article titled “Problems with
the Protocol,” for instance, was published in the November/December 2002
issue  of  Harvard  Magazine.  Common  observations  were  that  the  Kyoto
Protocol  was  economically  inefficient,  nonobjective,  inequitable,  and
ineffective. One of the major failures cited is the exclusion of China, “the
largest  future  source  of  CO
  emissions”  (and  now  the  current  largest
source). Critics also argued that the agreement gave Europeans a massive
advantage  over  other  countries  in  reducing  CO
  emissions  below  1990
levels.18

2

2

The 2008 completion date mandated by the Protocol was recognized to
present  major  problems  for  the  US.  Economists  argued  that  the  typical
lifetime  of  a  power  plant  is  approximately  30  years,  and  the  average  US
automobile is on the road for about 11 years. Changing the energy economy
too rapidly by retiring equipment would be economically unproductive.

Other  disagreements  with  the  protocol  argued  against  the  postulated
environmental  advantages  that  would  result  from  GHG  restrictions.  For
example, it awards credit for planting forests to sequester carbon but does
so  in  a  way  that  provides  economic  incentives  to  destroy  wetlands,
potentially  creating  net  excess  CO
  releases.  It  also  doesn’t  set  long-term
goals for reduction in atmospheric CO
  concentrations.  Many  believe  that
the real effects upon climate change would be virtually nonexistent in any

2

2

case, because an estimated 2 to 3 percent emission reduction by 2050 would
be well within the margin of error, not to mention being trivial compared
with natural sequestration by the marine and terrestrial biosphere.

European Agendas: Hot Air and Smoke Screens

 

The  terms  and  conditions  put  forth  in  the  Kyoto  Protocol  have  been
strongly influenced and advocated by Western European governments that
have been greatly displeased with the United States’ unwillingness to buy
in. They have argued that the American refusal to ratify the protocol gives
this  country  an  unfair  economic  advantage  in  competition  with  other
industrialized countries and is unreasonable because of the high US GHG
emission levels as compared with theirs. Considering their own lack of any
real  progress  toward  meeting  those  emission  reduction  targets,  one  might
wonder  why  they  persist  in  championing  those  elusive  and  terrifically
costly  goals.  Many  contentious  disagreements  are  rooted  in  a  political
history and socialist philosophy that differ from ours in notable ways.19

One important difference between the US and many Western European
countries is the way political systems are structured and operate. Unlike this
country’s  two-party  system  with  winner-take-all  elections,  European
governments are most typically coalitions where minority parties, such as
“greens,”  can  wield  important  and  deciding  leverage  regardless  of  who
wins.  This  gives  minority  groups  with  special  agendas  real,  often
determinate power in the political arena.

Europe’s strongly socialist leanings saddle its populations with high tax
burdens  essential  to  support  large  welfare  programs  that  stunt  economic
investment and profitability essential for competition in global markets. In
contrast,  US  emphasis  upon  economic  growth  through  lower  taxes,  high
productivity, and strong employment levels is designed to support consumer
purchase  power.  It  is  only  reasonable,  at  least  from  a  Western  European
political perspective, to want to saddle the US with the high energy costs
associated  with  Protocol  compliance  that  will  help  level  the  field  of
international commerce.20

Selecting 1990 as the base year from which Kyoto emission reductions
are  to  be  measured  suspiciously  favors  several  European  countries  at  the
expense  of  US  interests,  placing  most  of  the  economic  burdens  upon

industries,  consumers,  and 

American 
taxpayers.  This  would  occur
regardless of whether any climate benefits were realistically achievable or
not.

While  US  emissions  today  are  higher  than  they  were  in  1990,  the
emissions  in  some  European  nations  are  actually  lower.  By  the  time  the
Kyoto Protocol was negotiated, German and British GHG emissions were
both  already  about  9  percent  below  1990  levels.  The  reunification  of
Germany  has  led  to  the  elimination  of  many  East  German  industries  that
were  huge  polluters,  lowering  their  emission  levels  below  the  1990
benchmark date. And the discovery of large natural gas fields in the North
Sea enabled Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher to break up the British Coal
Union in the 1980s and move the energy system to gas, phasing out large
segments of its coal industry. Yet, although Prime Minister Tony Blair later
proposed  to  reduce  CO
  emissions  60  percent  by  2050,  British  CO
emissions have actually increased more than 3 percent since 1997.21

The Kyoto Protocol provides a good excuse for European governments to
levy even higher taxes on oil for consumers in the laudable cause of saving
the  planet—  taxes  that  are  already  several  times  the  actual  cost  of  each
barrel.  Neither  current  lack  of  compliance  nor  prospects  for  even  higher
taxes,  however,  appears  to  have  substantially  dampened  general  Kyoto
popularity  in  Britain,  particularly  not  in  segments  of  its  scientific
community.22  For 
and
Commonwealth’s  national  academy  of  science)  recently  wrote  an  open
letter to the US oil company ExxonMobil demanding that it stop funding
global  warming  skeptics.  The  letter  particularly  mentions  the  negative
effects  of  such  skepticism  on  the  implementation  of  Kyoto  Protocol  CO
emission reductions.23

the  Royal  Society 

(the  UK 

example, 

2

2

2

Miraculous Conversion: Russia Gets Religion

 

The  Kyoto  Protocol  was  stalled  between  1997  and  2005  for  lack  of
sufficient signatories. Both the US and Australia had refused to ratify, for
somewhat  different  reasons.  The  US  objected 
the  unwarranted
destructive economic impacts and to the compliance exemptions extended
to China and India. Australia primarily objected to a condition that linked
GHG  emission  reduction  targets  to  per  capita  population  ratios,  which

to 

2

2

penalized them as an industrial country with relatively few people. Russia
had been another holdout, and the Europeans badly needed them to get on
board.

Originally,  Russian  president  Vladimir  Putin  had  announced  on
December 2, 2003, that his country would not ratify the protocol for reasons
similar  to  those  stated  by  President  George  W.  Bush  and  prominent
scientists  in  the  United  States.  Putin  observed  that  the  treaty  was
“scientifically  flawed”  and  that  “even  100  percent  compliance  with  the
Kyoto Protocol won’t reverse climate change.”24

The Russian Academy of Sciences presented scientific arguments against
signing  Kyoto  in  a  statement  issued  on  July  1,  2005.  It  noted  that  the
world’s  temperatures  do  not  follow  CO
  levels.  Instead,  the  academy
observed a much closer correlation between world temperatures and solar
activity than with CO
 levels. The Russian scientists had determined that sea
levels were not rising faster with warming; rather, they had been increasing
steadily about 6 inches per century since the Little Ice Age ended in about
1850.  They  discounted  one  of  the  most  significant  danger  claims  about
global warming—that tropical diseases would spread—noting that malaria
is  a  disease  encouraged  by  sunlit  pools  of  water  where  mosquitoes  can
breed,  not  by  climate  warmth.  They  also  pointed  out  the  lack  of  a
correlation between global warming and extreme weather, which a British
government  scientific  delegation  admitted  it  could  find  no  evidence  to
support.25

What,  then,  ultimately  caused  Putin  and  the  Russian  Duma  to  change
their position and ratify the protocol? It is widely speculated that Europeans
were  instrumental  in  getting  Russia  admitted  to  the  World  Trade
Organization  (WTO)  and  thus  categorized  as  a  developing  country  rather
than  a  developed  one  in  applying  the  protocol’s  regulations.  Russia  also
received  an  opportunity  to  sell  to  European  countries  billions  of  dollars’
worth of its former Soviet-era emission credits associated with former dirty
industries that had been casualties of economic meltdown. This would also
help Europe meet Kyoto’s first-phase requirements without actually cutting
emissions or energy use.

Europe’s 1990 CO

 emissions of 4,245 million tons fell to 4,123 million
tons in 2002 due to reductions in burning coal in both Britain and former
East Germany. Yet Kyoto Protocol requirements stipulated further European
Union (EU) cutbacks, to 3,906 million tons before 2012. A December 2003

2

UN report predicted that the EU would miss that reduction target by even
more than that amount, namely, by dropping an additional 311 million tons.
Since Russia’s 1990 emissions were 2,405 million tons and had fallen by
2001 to 1,614 million tons, they could sell up to 800 million tons of credits
to the Europeans at an “auction” price. This would be cheaper for Europe
than  shutting  down  fossil-fired  power  plants  or  removing  trucks  from  its
vital  transportation  infrastructure  by  escalating  already  high  diesel  fuel
taxes.

Incidentally,  the  United  States  would  not  be  given  comparable  breaks
such  as  those  accorded  to  the  Europeans  and  Russians.  First,  unlike
European  and  former  Soviet  countries  that  were  treated  as  separate
emission credit–trading entities, the US was treated as a single nation (no
credit exchanging between states to meet quotas). Second, the US emissions
in 1990 were not inflated to high target allowance levels as was the case in
Germany, Britain, and Russia, making compliance much more difficult to
achieve.26

Protocol Progress: Detours along the Road

 

2

Since  early  2005,  many  key  signatory  countries  have  found  that  their
CO
 emissions are increasing rather than diminishing. Problems in meeting
targets have become clear to many—some of whom realized this probability
before the Kyoto Protocol was even enacted.

Canada, which ratified the treaty on December 17, 2002, had agreed to
reduce emissions to 6 percent below 1990 levels between 2008 and 2012.
The  country  was  influenced  by  numerous  polls  indicating  high  levels  of
public  support  (about  70  percent  approval).  By  2003,  Canada’s  federal
government had already claimed to have spent or committed $3.7 billion on
climate change programs. Yet by 2004, its CO
 emission levels had risen to
27 percent above 1990 levels (compared with an increase by 16 percent in
the  US  during  that  time).  On  April  25,  2006,  Canadian  environment
minister Rona Ambrose announced that the country would have no chance
of meeting its targets.27

By  May  31,  2002,  all  fifteen  then-members  of  the  EU  had  deposited
ratification paperwork at the UN, accounting for about 22 percent of global
greenhouse emissions at the time. This called for a cut, on average, to about

2

8  percent  below  1990  levels.  In  response,  the  EU  created  an  emissions
trading  system  that  introduced  reduction  targets  in  six  key  industries:
energy,  steel,  cement,  glass,  brick  making,  and  paper/cardboard.  It  also
imposed fines on member nations that failed to meet obligations. There was
some  criticism  among  other  developed  nations  that  the  EU’s  target  level
was unfair because it enabled reductions in East Germany to cover nearly
the entire 15 percent goal. On June 28, 2006, the German government then
announced that it would exempt its coal industry from compliance.28

Between 1990 and 2004, greenhouse emissions reported by the UN had
increased in more countries than had experienced reductions. Included were
Greece  (+27  percent),  Ireland  (+23  percent),  Japan  (+6.5  percent),  and
Portugal (+41 percent). As of 2005, Japan was nearly 8 percent above its
1990  levels  and  considered  seeking  to  purchase  emission  rights  from
Russia.  Attempting  to  meet  its  obligation  any  other  way  might  have
reversed its decade-long recovery from an economic recession, thrusting the
nation back into a full-scale depression.29

Why  have  these  increases  occurred?  A  key  reason  is  because  fossils
continue  to  be  the  lifeblood  of  industry  and  commerce,  and  alternative
sources have not significantly offset growing net energy demands.

2

2

In the meantime, China has overtaken all other countries as the world’s
  emitter.  Exemptions  of  China  and  India  were  granted  on  the
largest  CO
rationale  that  even  large  developing  countries  have  not  historically
contributed  as  much  to  atmospheric  CO
  levels  as  have  developed,
industrialized nations; that emission levels should be calculated on a per-
capita  population  basis;  and  that  stringent  restrictions  will  handicap
economic  development  critical  for  those  nations’  social  well-being.  At  a
June  2005  G8  meeting,  Indian  prime  minister  Manmohan  Singh  repeated
the argument that per-capita emission rates are but a tiny fraction of those in
the  developed  world.  Adopting  the  Kyoto  principle  of  “common  but
differentiated  responsibility,”  India  agrees  that  the  major  responsibility  of
curbing  emissions  rests  with 
that  have
accumulated emissions over a long period of time.30

those  developed  countries 

By  2005,  China  and  India,  both  experiencing  rapid  industrial  and
economic growth, were making up for that lost time. China’s huge economy
had been expanding more than 8 percent per year, and India’s more than 5
percent—compared  with  about  3  to  4  percent  annual  US  growth  and
lagging economies and high unemployment in the EU.31

Neither  China  nor  India  welcomed  restrictions  that  would  limit  their
progress.  As  Lu  Xuedu,  deputy  director  of  China’s  Office  of  Global
Environmental  Affairs,  pointed  out,  “You  cannot  tell  people  who  are
struggling to earn enough to eat that they need to reduce their emissions.”32
A  gloom  regarding  Kyoto  Protocol  progress  descended  even  before
Russia’s ratification carried it into full force in February 2005. During the
tenth  Conference  of  Parties  that  was  held  in  Buenos  Aries  only  a  few
months earlier, science writer Ron Bailey believed it was already hopeless.

The  Kyoto  Protocol  is  dead—there  will  be  no  further  global
treaties  that  set  binding  limits  on  the  emissions  of  greenhouse  gases
after Kyoto runs out in 2012 . . . The conventional wisdom, that it’s the
United  States  against  the  rest  of  the  world  in  climate  change
diplomacy, has been turned on its head. Instead, it turns out that it is
the Europeans who are isolated. China, India, and most of the rest of
the developing countries have joined forces with the United States to
completely reject the idea of future binding greenhouse gas emission
limits.33

Italian environment minister Altero Matteoli had stated in Buenos Aires,
“The  first  phase  of  the  protocol  ends  in  2012;  after  that  it  would  be
unthinkable  to  go  ahead  without  the  United  States,  China,  and  India  .  .  .
Seeing as these countries do not wish to talk about binding agreements, we
must  proceed  with  voluntary  accords,  bilateral  pacts,  and  commercial
partnerships.”34

It had also become clear after the Kyoto Protocol was officially enacted
that  a  second  phase  of  the  treaty  beyond  2012  would  require  even  more
aggressive  steps  over  and  above  the  original  5.3  percent  cut  (from  1990
levels)  to  stabilize  atmospheric  CO
  concentrations.  For  the  most  part,
global industrial economies were growing, most particularly in much of the
Third World. Yet it was already apparent by 2005 that most industrialized
members would not even meet those first-phase emissions reduction targets
—not by a long shot. European businesses and their customers were already
experiencing rising energy and production costs that resulted from attempts
at  compliance.  Power  outages  were  also  beginning  to  occur,  and  many
bureaucrats were feeling heat of an unnatural kind.

2

Hot Economic Disputes: Stern Warnings

 

The global warming crisis has been promulgated as not only what I call
a  “warmaggedon” 
terms,  but  one  with  epic  economic
consequences as well. This prophetic view gained a great deal of traction,
particularly  in  the  UK,  thanks  to  a  government-sponsored  “study”  that
produced the politically intended alarmist results.

in  human 

In  July  2005,  then-Chancellor  Gordon  Brown  of  the  UK  (later  prime
minister,  and  strong  global  warming  theory  advocate)  asked  Sir  Nicholas
Stern, a former World Bank vice president, to lead a major review on the
nature of economic challenges associated with climate change. The seven-
hundred-page  report,  the  “Stern  Review  on  the  Economics  of  Climate
Change”  (hereafter  referred  to  as  the  Stern  Review)  was  released  on
October  14,  2006,  and  gave  Brown  just  what  he  seemed  to  want—
something that would really attract public attention to the matter. The report
also  got  its  author  a  lot  of  attention.  As  British  environmental  secretary
David Miliband observed, “Nick Stern is now an international rock star in
the climate change world.”35

The Stern Review was not inhibited by facts or caution in presenting its
conclusions.  It  warned  that  inaction  on  climate  change  will  result  in  a
depressed UK economy worse than the Great Depression of the 1930s, and
that the financial cost would be higher than that depression combined with
the  subsequent  two  world  wars.  In  human  terms,  resulting  droughts  and
flooding would displace 200 million people from their homes, creating the
largest  migration  in  history.  Natural  disasters  would  also  result  in  the
extinction of up to 40 percent of the world’s known species. To avert this
tragedy  we  would  collectively  need  to  spend  1  percent  of  global  gross
domestic  product  (GDP),  which  was  equated  with  about  half  of  what  the
World Bank estimates would be the cost of a full-blown flu pandemic.36

The grim, urgent news made headlines around the world. As summed up
by  the  New  York  Times,  “[It]  predicted  apocalyptic  effects  from  climate
change,  including  droughts,  flooding,  famine,  skyrocketing  malaria  rates,
and  the  extinction  of  many  animal  species.  This  will  happen  during  the
current generation if changes are not made soon.”37

From an economic standpoint, that news was mixed. The bad news was
that the overall costs and risks from climate change are equivalent to losing
at least 5 percent of global GDP now and forever, and possibly up to 20

percent.  But  alternatively,  strong  action  to  combat  these  losses  will  cost
only about 1 percent of the GDP—a real bargain!

As Upton Sinclair once observed, “It’s hard to get a man to understand
something when his job depends upon not understanding it.” Sir Nicholas
did his job superbly, a fact that has been recognized by climate authorities
more knowledgeable about the subject than he. But many other authors of
academic  papers  characterize  his  report  as  a  “political  document,”  often
applying  such  terms  as  “preposterous,”  “incompetent,”  “deeply  flawed,”
and “neither balanced nor credible” to the report’s conclusions.38 Among the
variety  of  criticisms  that  have  been  levied  against  the  Stern  Review  are
these:

•    ”The  report  fails  to  present  an  accurate  picture  of  scientific
understanding  of  science  change  issues  and  massively  exaggerates
prospective  impacts  of  global  warming  that  are  tilted  toward
unwarranted  alarm.”  (Stern’s  background 
is  economics,  not
science.)

•    ”Dangers  from  climate  change  and  benefits  of  action  are  vastly
inflated.  As  several  peer-reviewed  papers  point  out,  the  Stern
Review does not present new data, or even a new model. There is no
way to justify conclusions outside the normal range. Damages are
counted several times and sometimes arbitrarily increased eightfold
or more according to new and conjectured cost strategies that have
never been peer-reviewed.”

•    ”Costs  of  actions  are  vastly  underestimated;  implausibly,  costs  of
renewable fuels are projected to drop sixfold by 2050; and costs of
action beyond 2050 are not included, although they will continue to
escalate far into the 23rd century.”39

Mike Hume, a professor in the School of Environmental Sciences at the
University of East Anglia, commented that the “Stern Review is not the last
word of scientists and economists, it’s the last word of civil servants.”40

But then, who can really blame them? As Sir John Houghton, lead author
on the first three IPCC “Summary for Policymakers” reports, wrote in his
book,  Global  Warming:  The  Complete  Briefing  (published  in  1994),
“Unless we announce disasters, no one will listen.”

Warm Remedies: Comparing Pains and Gains

 

2

For  the  sake  of  examination,  let’s  make  three  assumptions:  (1)  that
dangerous levels of global warming are likely to occur; (2) that human CO
emissions are responsible for global warming: and (3) that Kyoto emission
reduction countermeasures are strictly adhered to by all ratifying countries.
Now let’s ask the follow-on question: How much difference will it make if
those  assumptions  are  true?  Scientific  studies  indicate  that  the  benefits
would  be  negligible  and  probably  too  small  to  even  measure.  Even  if  all
developed, industrialized nations that signed the Kyoto Protocol were able
to not only reduce their overall emissions by 20 percent below what they
would otherwise have been between 2008 and 2012, but also stick to those
reductions until 2050, the estimated temperature-lowering benefit would be
only about 0.1ºF. Then, by 2100, it would still be only about 0.3 degrees
lower. This would only postpone the projected temperature increase of 4.7
degrees by 5 years—to 2105 rather than by 2100.41

Even  those  tiny  delays  are  extremely  unrealistic.  First,  most  of  those
signatory  nations  are  not  coming  close  to  meeting  their  reduction  targets
presently,  and  it  would  become  even  more  difficult  for  them  to  do  so  as
populations and industrial production levels continue to grow. Second, as
countries  that  can’t  reach  their  reduction  targets  through  cutbacks  turn  to
purchases of excess emission rights from Russia and other countries, actual
reductions  are  largely  fictitious.  Effective  net  outcomes  will  probably  be
very tiny indeed. And if no other treaty replaces Kyoto after 2012, the total
effect will be to postpone global temperature increases about a week or less
by 2100. These estimates, based upon IPCC’s models, are why a November
6,  2004,  editorial  in  the  Washington  Post  refers  to  Kyoto  as  a  “mostly
symbolic treaty.”

Computer  models  that  estimate  cost/benefit  correlations  between  CO
cuts and climate changes have been around since the early 1990s. Most are
quite similar, and they have a couple of big problems in common. One is
that  even  current  models  can’t  begin  to  accurately  predict  temperature
changes associated with added or reduced atmospheric CO
 concentrations,
because  there  are  many  other  forcing  influences  and  interactions  that  are
poorly understood. A second is that benefits of higher temperatures, which
can  also  be  very  significant,  don’t  fit  into  the  preconceived  policy
strategies. Still, let’s continue with the economic projections anyway.

2

2

It  has  been  estimated  that  for  full  Kyoto  Protocol  implementation
(including US participation), the total cost over the coming century would
be  more  than  $5  trillion,  and  for  this  investment  any  influences  upon
climate  would  be  tiny  at  best  and  highly  speculative  altogether.  The  US
would bear most of this cost, about four times as much as Europe—not a
very good deal for us. That money can otherwise be spent on lots of other
things that have measurable consequences, such as education, public health
services, roads, Social Security benefits, tax relief, and yes, even foreign aid
to underdeveloped and developing nations.42

The scheme would, however, be a good deal for the Russians, who might
sell their old Soviet-era emissions credits to the US and Europe at a high
price, nearly $3 trillion. That’s a lot of money for hot air, and much of that
burden would fall on the backs of American taxpayers. Politicians, be afraid
—be very afraid—of the repercussions. All this for a theoretical and highly
unlikely lowering effect on global temperature of about 0.7ºF by 2100. This
assumes,  of  course,  that  the  cooling  trend  we  are  currently  experiencing
doesn’t accomplish this, and do so very naturally.

Contentions in Copenhagen

 

The Copenhagen Summit of December 2009 got off to a chilly start, but
that was only the beginning. Not even the GHG emissions spewed by more
than 1,200 limousines and 140 private jets that delivered 110 heads of state
and other distinguished participants seemed adequate to comfortably warm
the  political  atmosphere.  Called  “the  Earth’s  last  chance,”  this  fifteenth
United  Nations  FCCC  gathering  ultimately  proved  to  be  a  real,  not  a
mythic, disaster for the fifteen thousand attendees and their global warming
boosters.

Some  inauspicious  events  leading  up  to  the  meeting  may  have
contributed to that disaster. The CRU scandal had been exposed on global
media  outlets  just  weeks  before.  A  December  defeat  of  Australian  prime
minister  Kevin  Rudd’s  proposed  capand-trade  legislation  as  a  job-killing
bill was undoubtedly another disappointment.

While  developing  countries  called  for  a  demand  that  the  rich  ones
commit many billions of dollars to them and accept sharper emission cuts,
US  and  European  representatives  stated  that  their  nations  were  willing  to

provide their “fair share,” amounting to $10 billion per year from 2010 to
2012. This, according to Sudan’s UN ambassador Lumumba Stanislaus Di-
Aping,  would  not  be  nearly  adequate:  “[It]  would  not  buy  developing
countries’ citizens enough coffins.”43

George Soros agreed. During a press conference at the Copenhagen talks,
he said that the $10 billion proposal is “not sufficient,” and that the gaps
between what developing countries want and what developed countries are
willing to give “could actually wreck the conference.” Instead, he suggested
moving $100 billion from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), which is
being used for financial systems that have been bitten by a global economic
downturn, to help countries mitigate and adapt to climate change.

Discussions  were  temporarily  interrupted  as  representatives  of  several
undeveloped countries walked out of the meetings and angry riots broke out
in the streets over the social injustice of such paltry penance. Secretary of
State Hillary Clinton then came to the rescue, offering to up the ante with a
$100  billion  annual  contribution  from  the  United  States  and  our  more
prosperous friends to the “poorest and most vulnerable [nations] among us”
by  2020.  She  said  that  the  money  would  come  from  “a  wide  variety  of
sources, public and private, bilateral and multilateral, including alternative
sources  of  finance.”  Where  it  would  actually  come  from  no  one  knew,
including Hillary and her boss.

Judging  from  the  tumultuous  standing  ovation  following  a  speech  by
Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez, there was general agreement regarding
where to lay blame for the world’s social, economic, and climate problems.

•  ”If the climate was a bank, [the West] would have already saved it.”
•  ”The destructive model of capitalism is eradicating life.”
•    ”Our  revolution  seeks  to  help  all  people  …  Socialism,  the  other
ghost that is probably wandering around this room, that’s the way to
save the planet; capitalism is the road to hell … Let’s fight against
capitalism and make it obey us.”44

It is possible that an almighty force signaled approval of Chavez’s vision
by dumping 4 inches of snow on the Copenhagen delegation there to fight
global warming. Denmark’s maritime climate and winters are warmer than
those  of  its  Scandinavian  neighbors.  According  to  Henning  Gisseloe,  an
official at Denmark’s Meteorological Institute, there was “a good chance of

a white Christmas.” This hadn’t occurred in 14 years and has happened only
seven times during the last century. 45 But with all that hot air at the podium,
most of the attendees may not have noticed the blizzard outside.

China  offered  merely  to  reduce  its  “carbon  intensity  per  unit  of
production.”  Given  that  country’s  rate  of  growth,  total  emissions  will
nevertheless  double  over  the  next  decade  under  even  the  most  optimistic
scenario.46

to  stop  global  warming.  The 

Nevertheless, China did add to the dialogue by introducing the topic of
population control, one of the real agenda items hidden beneath the UN’s
movement 
in
Copenhagen  by  Chinese  delegate  Zhao  Baige:  “Population  and  climate
change are intertwined, but the population issue has remained a blind spot
when  countries  discuss  ways  to  mitigate  climate  change  and  slow  down
global  warming.”  She  did  not  mention,  however,  that  her  country  faces
what some have called a looming demographic crisis resulting from “family
planning practices,” with an aging population, a reduced workforce, and a
severe nationwide gender imbalance from sex-selective abortions.47

topic  was 

introduced 

Some  delegates,  such  as  Diane  Francis,  who  authored  a  broadly
circulated December 8 opinion article in the Canadian newspaper National
Post,  expressed  her  belief  that  imposing  China’s  one-child  policy  on  all
nations  is  just  what  is  needed.  This  would  reduce  the  current  world
population  of  6.5  billion  to  3.5  billion  by  2075.  And  just  prior  to  the
summit,  Britain’s  Optimum  Population  Trust  launched  a  carbon-offset
scheme. Participants who attended would be able to offset the 1.1 tons of
carbon  emissions  spewed  into  the  atmosphere  from  their  trans-Atlantic
flights  by  donating  $7  to  a  family  planning  program.  Apparently,  no
benefits  were  offered  to  those  who  traveled  by  bicycle  or  sailboat,  the
preferred travel modes recommended by the UN’s IPCC.48

One  week  prior  to  the  summit,  Jairam  Ramesh  told  India’s  Parliament
that the country would plan to reduce the ratio of pollution to production by
20 to 25 percent compared with 2005 levels, but like China, they would not
accept  a  legally  binding  emissions  reduction  target.  India  currently  ranks
fifth in the world in CO
 emissions, accounting for 4.7 percent of the total.49
President Obama arrived near the end of the meetings and confirmed that
global warming is real and the time for talking is over. Then, after talking
with  leaders  from  China  and  India  and  announcing  a  “breakthrough”  in
understanding,  he  returned  to  Washington  into  a  raging  record-breaking

2

snowstorm  that  covered  most  of  the  Eastern  Seaboard.  So,  on  second
thought, maybe that effort to stop global warming achieved some temporary
influence after all.

Where  does  the  road  from  Copenhagen  lead?  The  next  stop  is  a  2010
climate summit that will take place in Mexico City. It is, once again, the
Earth’s only chance.

involved 

2

A Different Copenhagen Consensus

 

first  panel 

In  2004,  Bjorn  Lomborg,  then-director  of  the  Danish  government’s
Environmental  Assessment  Institute,  conducted  a  project  cosponsored  by
his  government  and  the  Economist  newspaper.  The  project,  called  the
Copenhagen Consensus, invited some very smart people to indicate where
best  to  put  resources  to  solve  the  world’s  most  urgent  challenges,  based
upon  “rational  prioritization.”  The 
top-level
economists, including four Nobel laureates who were asked to suggest the
best solutions for a series of problems. For example, with global warming,
the solution might be CO
 taxes or the Kyoto Protocol; for malnutrition, it
might be agricultural research; and for malaria, it might be mosquito nets.
The experts were not just asked which solutions would be desirable; they
were also required to determine the dollar values and costs. They estimated
benefits of Kyoto for each of the positive impacts upon agriculture, forestry,
fisheries,  water  supply,  human  damage,  etc.,  and  they  estimated  costs
through losses of production. In the case of malaria solutions, the beneficial
aspects would be measured in terms of the assigned value of fewer dead,
fewer sick, fewer work absences, more robust populations with respect to
other diseases, and increased production. Malaria intervention costs would
be equated to dollars spent to purchase, distribute, and use mosquito nets.

The study asked the experts to prepare a summary global priority list of
challenges and opportunities divided into “very good,” “good,” and “fair”
categories according to the relative amount of benefit for each dollar spent.
“Bad”  opportunities—those  that  would  cost  more  than  their  value—were
also  listed.  Some  of  the  top  priorities  the  experts  listed  correspond  with
primary  risk  factors  that  have  been  identified  by  the  World  Health
Organization. Preventing HIV/AIDS turned out to be best. Each dollar spent
on  condoms  and  information  was  estimated  to  produce  about  40  dollars’

worth of social good (fewer dead, fewer sick, less social disruption, etc.),
with $27 billion saving 28 million lives over the coming years.50

The panel placed climate change opportunities at the bottom of the list
under the “bad” category. Of these bad opportunities, Kyoto ranked second
to the last, just below an “optimal carbon tax ($25–$300).” In other words,
Kyoto would end up doing very little good for the world relative to costs.

The  Copenhagen  Consensus  study  then  invited  eighty  college  students
from  all  over  the  world  to  assess  top  global  priorities  through  a  5-day
workshop  discussion.  This  group  included  representatives  from  the  arts,
physical sciences, and social sciences, with an equal number of young men
and women and with 70 percent from developing countries. After meeting
with  world-class  experts  on  each  of  the  major  challenge  and  opportunity
categories,  the  students  arrived  at  conclusions  that  were  very  similar  to
those of the first group. Malnutrition and communicable diseases ranked as
top priorities, and climate change was next to last.

It didn’t end there. In 2006, the project was conducted again, this time
involving  a  wide  range  of  UN  ambassadors  in  the  poll.  In  addition  to
participants from the three largest countries—China, India, and the United
States—representatives  of  nations  as  diverse  as  Angola,  Australia,  and
Azerbaijan  participated,  along  with  Canada,  Chile,  Egypt,  Iraq,  Mexico,
Nigeria, Poland, Somalia, South Korea, Tanzania, Vietnam, Zimbabwe, and
many others. This political group was considered to be more difficult to pin
down to firm conclusions because they tended to prefer treating all issues as
equal priorities—wanting to solve everything with unlimited financing. But
they ultimately did make choices. And those choices closely matched those
arrived  at  by  the  other  groups  of  2004.  Communicable  diseases,  clean
drinking  water,  and  malnutrition  ranked  highest.  Again,  climate  change
dragged along near the bottom.51

Climate Change: Politics of Planetary Peril

 

If  the  results  of  the  Copenhagen  Consensus  seem  surprising,  why  is
that? Is it true that most people’s priorities don’t include a global warming
fix? If so, then why is global warming considered to be such a big deal? Is it
because we are being told over and over that we are facing a climate change
crisis,  but  find  it  difficult  sometimes  to  remember  what  it  is  that  is  so

frightening—except that it must be something really, really bad? Didn’t it
have something to do with New York City becoming New York Atlantis …
and exhausted, drowning polar bears … and, oh yeah, the hurricanes?

It is difficult to imagine a time in recent history when so much political
hype has swirled around so little substance. Is it logical to wager trillions of
dollars based upon flawed science practices and suspect agendas?

2

Consider, for example, the momentum of Kyoto and Copenhagen. Was
the UN’s Framework Convention on Climate Change seriously motivated
by  concern  about  global  warming  causing  rising  oceans  due 
to
anthropogenic GHGs, only about a decade after scientific conjectures about
a coming Ice Age? Did IPCC summary reports have solid scientific bases
on which to support their conclusions, or were their assertions based upon
admittedly unreliable climate models that global warming would continue
to present global threats throughout the century unless CO
 emissions were
dramatically reduced? Were Kyoto Protocol emission-cutting terms, based
upon  IPCC  conclusions,  significantly  influenced  by  particular  economic
interests  of  European  Union  members,  along  with  China  and  India?  Did
Russia  have  a  religious  epiphany  concerning  Kyoto  ratification  that
reversed its skepticism about global warming importance, which coincided
with Europe’s invitation to join the World Trade Organization and market
Soviet-era emission credits? And is there a logical basis for the US, or any
country, to subject citizens to the economic burdens that Kyoto compliance
would impose, when any climate benefits would be immeasurably small?

Who  will  pay  the  ultimate  costs  of  fighting  the  unnecessary  and
unwanted  war  against  climate  change?  You  will.  Your  children  and
grandchildren will. People who can least afford them will. And these costs
won’t  be  cheap.  Yale  University  economist  William  Nordhaus,  who  is
probably the best authority on this subject, estimates that the first phase of
Kyoto would cost about $716 billion, with the US, if participating, bearing
two-thirds of the global burden.  52 We can be very certain about one thing
however: That’s only the beginning.

Section Three

Carbon Demonization Scams

Chapter 7

CAP-AND-TAX DAISY CHAIN

Follow the money.

Cap-and-trade  legislation,  a  major  Obama-Biden  administration
priority,  has  no  defensible  purpose  without  a  supporting  global  warming
crisis rationale. It also makes no sense from an economic standpoint. It will
place  onerous  cost  burdens  upon  energy  consumers,  continue  to  drive
businesses  overseas,  and  offer  no  real  climate  or  environmental  benefits
whatsoever. The same consequences apply in the event that CO
 emissions
come to be regulated by the EPA through the auspices of the Clean Air Act.
Such action would serve as a carbon-rationing precedent that paves the way
for cap-and-trade to follow.

Government  restrictions  upon  carbon  emissions  are  being  promoted  on
the basis of three errant and deceptive premises: (1) that they will help to

2

2

protect  our  planet  from  dangerous  climate  change  and  pollution;  (2)  that
they  are  needed  to  wean  the  United  States  and  the  world  away  from
excessive  energy  consumption;  and  (3)  that  they  will  incentivize  energy
technology  and  conservation  innovations  that  will  lead  to  independence
from foreign oil.

The  initial  premise  is  wrong  on  two  accounts.  First,  there  is  no  real
evidence  of  any  human-caused  climate  crisis.  Second,  there  is  no  real
evidence  that  any  attempts  to  reduce  atmospheric  CO
  emissions  would
have any significant climate influence. Simply because the EPA, parroted
by media propaganda, condemns CO
 as a “pollutant,” that does not make it
so. Such a declaration only misleads people and confuses this natural and
essential molecule with real pollutants that truly should be restricted.

2

The  second  premise,  that  carbon  restrictions  are  necessary  for  energy
consumption  control,  follows  the  ideological  agendas  of  the  UN  and  its
IPCC. Specifically targeted at the US and other affluent industrial countries,
the  restrictions  are  intended  to  artificially  drive  up  energy  costs  to  levels
that  curtail  consumption-based  capitalism.  The  burdens  of  this  zero-sum-
gain  strategy  will  fall  heaviest  upon  population  segments  that  can  least
afford them.

The third premise, that carbon penalties attached to fossil-fueled utilities
will incentivize alternative technology innovations, is misleading in several
respects.  Heavily  financed  promotions  fail  to  inform  the  public  of  the
limited-capacity  potentials  afforded  by  “renewable”  energy  sources,  most
particularly  in  regard  to  the  urgent  time  frames  required  to  substantially
offset  demands.  Unfounded  technology  promises  provide  excuses  for
expanding  government  control  and  spending,  unwarranted  mandates,
subsidies,  and  profit-taking  fortunes  for  those  who  play  the  system.  Free
markets built upon delivery of competitive values are compromised when
government is empowered to pick the winners and losers through policies
that  reward  promises  over  performance.  We,  the  taxpayers  and  captive
consumers, cover the costs.

Carbon Cap-Trap

 

In case you’re not very familiar with the way cap-and-trade works, here
is a very basic description. It enables fossil fuel–dependent corporations to

2

promote  themselves  as  being  “carbon  neutral”  by  purchasing  “carbon
offsets” from other entities in the form of emissions reductions elsewhere,
or by claiming that they are achieving CO
 absorption by planting trees to
offset their “carbon footprints.” You might liken the concept to the sale of
indulgences  by  medieval  churches  through  divine  authority.  A  more
contemporary illustration would be to imagine that someone in prison offers
to pay for some of your “good behavior” credits, literally as a “get-out-of–
jail ticket.” The central question would be, how much do you think it would
really  reduce  crime?  As  former  Clinton-Gore  administration  employee
Joseph  Romm  characterized  the  legislative  ploy,  “The  vast  majority  of
offsets are, at some level, just rip-offsets.”1

Unlike futures markets that can be defended as a means to secure long-
term investments essential to help stabilize volatile energy and food prices,
trading of carbon credits involves creation of a market that arbitrarily prices
a  fictitious  commodity  that  has  no  value  whatsoever.2  Such  a  market  can
exist only as long as fear of global warming crises can be perpetuated by
special interest agendas. It requires that government legislation be enacted
to  ration  emissions  at  compliance  levels  that  give  carbon  a  trade  value,
albeit a negative one, so that allowances can be sold by those who don’t
need them to others who have run out of forgiveness coupons. Energy and
product consumers transform the negative carbon commodity into positive
cash benefits for both sides through higher prices.3

Then  there  is  the  matter  of  continued  expansion  of  government
legislative  interference  in  free  market  operations.  How  might  this  impact
volatility? Uncertainties and rumors about government policy changes have
major  market  impacts,  so  just  think  about  the  added  volatility  a  new
derivative carbon bureaucracy could create. When that market tanks, who
will bail out the losers? Any guesses?

Before  cap-and-trade  legislation  is  enacted,  consider  some  important

lessons from the Kyoto Protocol.

1.  Most of the signatories have not found it possible to comply, even

though the 1990 benchmark date gave the EU every advantage.

2.    Trading  conditions  between  corporations  would  be  no  different
from Russia peddling its old Soviet-era credits to other countries—
with no net reductions.

3.  Assuming that full compliance was achieved, which is extremely
unlikely, the climate change impacts would be too small to measure.
And even the most optimistic CO
 reduction goals are founded upon
highly speculative assumptions that climate change is unnatural, that
man-made  GHGs  are  a  principal  cause,  and  that  consequences  of
continued warming (if that happens) are worse than the alternative
—a colder world. History suggests otherwise.

2

It may be interesting to note that the United States has indeed made real
progress  in  energy  economies,  along  with  emissions  reductions  as  a  by-
product. Based upon the amount of energy used to produce a dollar value in
output, this country reduced energy intensity by 20 percent over the period
from  1992  to  2004,  compared  to  only  11.5  percent  in  the  EU  under  a
mandatory  approach.  This  has  also  enabled  economic  growth,  which
averaged  more  than  3  percent  annually  between  1992  and  2005  as
compared with about 1 percent in the EU.4

The  federal  Energy  Information  Administration  (EIA)  reported  in  May
2010 that GHGs fell 7 percent during 2009, the largest-ever percentage and
absolute decline since the EIA began tracking such data in 1949. In fact, the
US  carbon  footprint  has  shrunk  in  three  of  the  last  four  years.  The  2009
decline was particularly dramatic and was attributed to a severe economic
downturn. It took a 3.3 percent drop in per capita GDP and a 4.8 percent
decline  in  overall  energy  consumption  (9  percent  in  industry)  to  produce
most  of  this  circumstance.  Expanded  switching  by  electric  utilities  from
more carbon-heavy coal to natural gas is also believed to have had some
influence.  Yet  it  should  always  be  recognized  that  economic  health  and
energy  use  are  tightly  linked,  as  well  as  that  oil,  coal,  and  other  fossils
continue  to  make  up  about  83  percent  of  America’s  energy  mix.  Cap-
andtrade  and/or  EPA-imposed  restrictions  on  carbon  will  have  costly
economic and social consequences.5

Big Deals

 

Some companies would definitely benefit from cap-and-trade, a policy
that  was  supported  by  one  of  the  strongest  corporate  US  boosters  of  the
Kyoto Protocol. Enron, a major natural gas distributor, recognized that the

approach would kill coal-fired electricity production and provide its energy
traders opportunities to capitalize on big trading commissions. An internal
Enron memorandum initiated by its head, Kenneth Lay, stated that Kyoto
would  “do  more  to  promote  Enron’s  business  than  almost  any  other
regulatory initiative outside the restructuring [of] the energy and natural gas
industries in Europe and the United States.”6

Enron had a major influence on events that led up to proposed cap-and-
trade legislation in the United States. So did Al Gore and some other people
and organizations that collaborated with them.

Back  in  the  1990s,  Enron  was  diversifying  its  energy  business  to
emphasize natural gas. The company had already owned the largest natural
gas  pipeline  that  existed  outside  Russia,  a  colossal  interstate  network.
Natural gas was having difficulties competing with coal, and the company
needed  help  in  Washington  to  tip  the  playing  field.  Hype  about  a  global
warming  crisis  advanced  by  then-Senator  Gore’s  1988  congressional
hearings on the topic provided a dream opportunity, and Enron hired Gore’s
star  witness,  James  Hansen,  as  a  consultant.  They  also  began  direct
discussions with Senator Gore.7

Some  Democrats  in  Congress  were  already  aggressively  pursuing
development of green legislation models. Senators John Heinz (R-PA) and
Timothy  Wirth  had  previously  cosponsored  “Project  88”  to  provide  a
pathway  for  converting  environmental  issues  into  business  opportunities.
Media-fueled alarm about acid rain provided a basis for legislation to create
markets  for  buying  and  selling  excess  sulfur  dioxide  (SO
)  and  nitrogen
dioxide emission credits, and Project 88 became the Clean Air Act of 1990.
Enron was a big SO

 market cap-and-trade player.

So  Enron  and  others  wondered,  why  not  do  the  same  thing  with  CO
?
Because natural gas is a lower CO
 emitter than coal is, that development
would certainly be a profitability game changer. But there was a problem.
CO
 wasn’t a pollutant. At least it wasn’t considered to be then, and the EPA
had no authority to regulate it.

After Senator Wirth became undersecretary of state for global affairs in
the  Clinton-Gore  administration,  he  began  working  closely  with  Enron’s
boss,  Lay,  to  lobby  Congress  to  grant  the  EPA  authority  to  control  CO
.
Between  1994  and  1996,  the  Enron  Foundation  contributed  nearly  $1
million to the Nature Conservancy, and together with the Pew Center and
the Heinz Foundation, they engaged in an energetic and successful global

2

2

2

2

2

2

warming fear campaign that included attacks on scientific dissenters.8 Yes,
that  is  the  exact  same  Heinz  Foundation,  headed  by  Teresa  Heinz  Kerry,
that gave a $250,000 award to James Hansen, who then publicly supported
her husband in his failed presidential bid.

A September 1, 1998, letter from Enron CEO Lay to President Clinton
requested that he “moderate the political aspects” of the climate discussion
by  appointing  a  “Blue  Ribbon  Commission.”  The  intent  of  the  proposed
commission, which was billed as an “educational effort,” was clear: to trash
disbelievers and cut off debate on the matter. Lay had direct contact earlier
with  the  White  House  when  he  met  with  Clinton  and  Gore  on  August  4,
1997,  to  prepare  a  strategy  for  the  upcoming  Kyoto  conference  that
December.  Kyoto  was  the  first  step  toward  creating  a  carbon  market  that
Enron desperately wanted Congress to support.9

Carbon Brokers: Pros and Cons

 

Cap-and-trade  pressure  on  US  legislators  extends  beyond  our  borders
and  also  involves  state  government  proponents.  The  International  Carbon
Action  Partnership  (ICAP),  established  in  October  2007,  operates  as  an
“open forum” comprised of state, regional, and international authorities and
governments that have pursued or are actively pursuing mandatory cap-and-
trade  systems.  Members  include  the  EU,  Australia,  New  Zealand,  and
Norway,  along  with  several  US  state  governments  and  the  Canadian
provinces of British Columbia and Manitoba. ICAP’s organizing purposes
are to enable members to learn from one another how to create a consistent
regulatory  framework  across  national  borders  and  how  to  develop  future
linked markets.10

Several  entities  have  become  well  positioned  to  capitalize  upon  those
markets. Al Gore’s Generation Investment Management LLP, for example,
is  a  London-based  firm  established  in  2004  that  invests  money  from
institutions  and  wealthy  investors  that  are  “going  green.”  GIM  plans  to
purchase CO
 offsets as soon as federal government regulations are passed
to  mandate  cap-and-trade.  Gore’s  cofounding  partners  in  the  venture  are
former chief of Goldman Sachs Asset Management (GSAM) David Blood,
along  with  Mark  Ferguson  and  Peter  Harris,  also  of  Goldman  Sachs.
Bloom-berg  reported  in  March  2008  that  the  investment  fund  had  hit  its

2

hard cap of $5 billion and had been turning away investors.11 Now many of
those  investors  may  be  running  away  after  suffering  big  losses  due  to
shifting political winds in Washington, DC.12

Another  organization  with  friends  in  very  high  places  is  the  Chicago
Climate Exchange (CCX), which was created in 2003 as a “voluntary pilot
agency”  and  aspires  to  be  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange  for  carbon-
emission  trading.  The  CCX  was  initiated  in  2000  with  support  from  a
$347,000  grant  to  Northwestern  University’s  Kellogg  Graduate  School  of
Management from the Chicago-based Joyce Foundation for a study to test
the  viability  of  a  future  carbon-credit  market.  This  transaction  occurred
when a young community organizer, Barack Obama, served on the Joyce
Foundation’s board of directors, along with his mentor and present White
House adviser, Valerie Jarrett. A current CCX board member is none other
than  Al  Gore’s  longtime  pal  and  Rio  de  Janeiro  Earth  Summit  leader
Maurice Strong. Another is Stuart Eizenstat, who led the US delegation to
Kyoto.

The  Joyce  Foundation  has  a  history  of  funding  liberal  causes.  For
example,  it  has  been  a  big  financial  supporter  of  legal  scholarship  to
demonstrate  that  the  Second  Amendment  of  the  US  Constitution  doesn’t
protect  individual  gun  ownership,  and  it  has  made  contributions  to  the
Center for American Progress and George Soros’s Tide Foundation. Total
Joyce Foundation start-up contributions for CCX were about $1.1 million,
and  its  president,  Paula  DiPerna,  later  left  the  organization  to  become
executive vice president of CCX.

CCX was cofounded by Richard Sandor, a former research professor at
Kellogg  when  they  received  the  Joyce  grant,  and  former  Goldman  Sachs
CEO  Hank  Paulson.  Sandor  has  received  8  million  shares  of  CCX  stock,
which  are  now  estimated  to  be  worth  about  $260  million  even  before  a
national  cap-and-trade  system  is  in  place.  GSAM  is  the  biggest  CCX
shareholder  (about  18  percent),  and  Al  Gore’s  GIM—with  his  three
Goldman Sachs cofounders—is fifth largest (about 10 percent). Mr. Sandor
has projected that CCX will become a $10 trillion company by 2050 with
passage  of  cap-and-trade  legislation.  That  would  certainly  afford  a  very
lucrative investment payback.13

Goldman  Sachs  is  also  heavily  invested  in  the  Obama  presidency.
According  to  figures  released  by  the  Federal  Election  Commission  to  the
Center for Responsive Politics, Goldman’s political action committee and

its  individual  contributors  were  the  campaign’s  second  largest  donors
($994,795).14

So far, however, CCX has a long way to go before delivering on investor
expectations. Trading commenced at $1 per cubic metric ton of carbon in
January 2008, reaching a $7 per metric ton peak in May of that year. The
market  (along  with  GIM’s  investment  value)  then  plummeted  to  $0.10  in
October  2009.  The  early  May  2008  speculators  lost  98.6  percent  of  their
investment.15

The  actual  operating  system  for  CCX  trading  has  been  provided  by
deposed  former  Fannie  Mae  head  Franklin  Raines,  who  originally
purchased  the  unpatented  technology  rights  developed  by  the  late  Carlin
Bartells.  Raines,  who  received  $90  million  in  salary  and  bonuses  over  5
years,  had  became  an  expert  in  bundling  worthless  real  estate  mortgages
that  led  to  the  near  collapse  of  the  US  economy.  This  serves  as  an
indispensible talent for bundling worthless air credits. Fortuitously, a patent
was  issued  for  the  technology  on  November  7,  2006,  the  day  after
Democrats swept the congressional elections.

CCX  member  organizations  include,  among  other  companies,  the  Ford
Motor Company, Amtrak, DuPont, Dow Corning, American Electric Power,
International  Paper,  Motorola,  and  Waste  Management,  along  with  the
states  of  Illinois  and  New  Mexico,  seven  cities,  and  a  number  of
universities.  As  planned,  these  members  would  “purchase”  carbon  offsets
on the CCX trading exchange and make contributions to or investments in
organizations that provide “alternative” or “renewable” energy.16

Almost  from  its  inception,  CCX  has  had  a  strong  connection  with  the
Atlanta-based  Intercontinental  Exchange,  Inc.  (ICE),  whose  subsidiary  is
the International Petroleum Exchange (IPE), the world’s largest petroleum
futures options market. In May 2010, ICE agreed to purchase the CCX and
its  parent  company,  Climate  Exchange,  along  with  two  of  its  other
exchanges (Chicago Climate Futures and European Climate Exchange), for
$603 million. While this amount is lower than the more than $1 billion ICE
reportedly paid for the New York Board of Trade in 2007, it still represents
a healthy valuation of fifty-eight times earnings.17

ICEcapades

 

During a May 8, 2006, Senate Democratic Policy meeting, Senator Carl
Levin  (D-MI)  stated  that  futures  speculation  trading  on  ICE  had  been  a
driver  for  adding  $20–$25  to  the  price  of  every  barrel  of  oil,  causing
hardship  to  industry,  households,  and  underdeveloped  nations.18  Senator
Levin’s website reported that in 2007, his Subcommittee on Investigations
released a report titled “Excessive Speculation in the Natural Gas Market,”
which found that a single hedge fund named Amarath, trading through ICE,
had  dominated  the  natural  gas  market  during  the  spring  and  summer  of
2006.  The  report  concluded  that  an  “Enron  Loophole  Act”  had  enabled
unregulated  trading,  which  increased  hedging  costs  that  increased  winter
gas purchases of the Municipal Gas Authority of Georgia by $18 million
alone.  Levin’s  subcommittee  reported:  “Amarath’s  massive  trades  turned
the natural gas market into a giant electronic casino, where all natural gas
buyers  and  sellers  were  forced  to  bet  either  with  or  against  Amarath.
American  businesses  and  consumers  were  socked  with  higher  prices  for
natural  gas  last  winter  as  a  result.  We  cannot  afford  to  let  large  energy
traders  continue  to  play  speculation  and  manipulation  games  with  US
energy prices and supplies. It’s way past time to close the Enron loophole
and put the cop back on the beat in all US energy markets.”19

Richard Sandor—the cofounder and chairman of CCX, now chairman of
the Climate Exchange, and ICE board of director since 2002—is considered
to be one of the fathers of derivatives and futures. He concocted weather
futures,  earthquake  futures,  Ginnie  Mae  futures,  and  others.  He  has  also
served  as  a  director  on  the  board  of  the  London  International  Financial
Futures and Options Exchange, the largest trading market in London.20

On  September  7,  2004,  ICE  released  an  announcement  with  this
headline:  “CCX  and  IPE  Sign  Corporation  and  Licensing  Agreement  for
EU  Emissions  Trading  Scheme/Chicago  Climate  Exchange  Sales  and
Marketing  Subsidiary  to  Be  Based  in  Amsterdam.”  That  arrangement
created  the  European  Carbon  Exchange  (ECX)  as  a  CCX  wholly  owned
subsidiary.  According  to  Sandor,  “This  agreement  positions  CCX  as  a
global leader in emissions trading, and complements IPE’s leadership in the
European energy markets.” Carbon offsets have now been trading on ECX
since 2005.21

As  a  result,  arrangements  are  already  in  place  and  waiting  for  the  US
Congress to create a lucrative and consumer-costly carbon-trading market
in the United States. Investment advocates are ecstatic about the windfall

profit  prospects.  Sandor  predicts  that  CO
  will  become  the  largest
commodity traded in the world market as governments curtail emissions of
GHGs “that scientists say accelerate global warming.”22

2

It’s a Small World After All

 

ShoreBank,  a  small  Chicago  bank  that  nearly  went  bankrupt  from
subprime mortgage fiascos during the depths of the recession, was saved by
$35  million  in  taxpayer  TARP  bailout  money,  along  with  additional
financial  assistance  from  powerful  friends.  Included  were  the  Joyce
Foundation,  some  big  Wall  Street  firms  such  as  Goldman  Sachs,  and
influential private partners. It is now heavily invested in a variety of green
businesses,  including  solar  panel  manufacturing.  CCX  has  designated
ShoreBank as its “banking arm” and holds a big shareholder stake.23

Probably  coincidentally,  one  ShoreBank  cofounder,  Jan  Piercy,  was  a
Wellesley  College  roommate  of  Hillary  Clinton,  and  she  and  former
president  Bill  Clinton  are  small  investors.  A  former  ShoreBank  vice
chairman,  Bob  Nash,  was  the  deputy  campaign  manager  for  Hillary’s
presidential  bid.  Another  cofounder,  Mary  Houghton,  was  a  friend  of
President  Obama’s  mother  who  had  worked  for  Treasury  Secretary  Tim
Geithner’s father at the Ford Foundation. Howard Stanback, a Shore-Bank
board  member,  formerly  served  as  chairman  of  the  Woods  Foundation
where  Barack  Obama  and  terrorist  Bill  Ayres  were  board  members.
Stanback  had  been  previously  employed  by  New  Kenwood,  Inc.,  a  real
estate development company co-owned by Tony Rezko (who had arranged
a great deal with our President on a home purchase). ShoreBank’s director,
Adele  Simmons,  is  a  close  friend  of  Valerie  Jarrett,  and  now-deposed
Obama-Biden  administration  green  czar  Van  Jones  serves  as  their  green
projects marketing director.24

ShoreBank, its partners, and its investors will benefit handsomely if cap-
andtrade  legislation  is  passed.  Assuming  that  an  estimated  $10  trillion
passes through CCX accounts each year, the bank might earn close to $40
billion in interest charges. Al Gore could rake in many billions during the
first year alone, as would GIM, Goldman Sachs, and the Joyce Foundation.
And  even  if  this  money  doesn’t  materialize,  think  of  all  the  many

reminiscences  that  can  be  shared  among  longtime  friends  at  ShoreBank
reunions!

Climate Legislation: Changing the Labels

 

Cap-and-trade  recently  acquired  a  more  lofty-sounding  new  name  to
counteract toxic cap-and-tax derisions. Proponents began referring to it as
the  “Climate  and  Energy  Bill,”  or  simply  the  “Climate  Bill.”  Cosponsors
were senators John Kerry, Joe Lieberman (I-CT), and Lindsey Graham (R-
SC).  Senator  Kerry  explained  that  the  original  term  should  be  dropped
because “we’re talking about setting a target for the reduction of pollution,
which  is  why  we  don’t  call  it  cap-and-trade  anymore.  It’s  a  pollution
reduction  target  with  a  private  investment  incentive  for  companies  to  be
able  to  invest  in  deciding  how  they  want  to  meet  the  pollution  reduction
target.”23

Although the authors claimed that the proposed legislation didn’t include
a  cap-and-trade  system,  critics  argued  that  the  language  allowed  for  such
mechanisms  within  power  generation  and  manufacturing  sectors.  As
Senator Inhofe commented, “The one thing all of the versions [introduced
in recent years] have in common is that they are cap-and-trade.”24

Then, just when we might have thought cap-and-trade legislation labels
couldn’t  get  more  disingenuous,  senators  Kerry  and  Lieberman  upstaged
their  earlier  moniker  with  a  newly  proposed  “American  Power  Act.”  A
more appropriate description might be “American power grab.” In reality, it
has  little  to  do  with  developing  our  nation’s  vast  domestic  fossil  energy
resources. Rather, it emphasizes ways to mitigate their alleged effects upon
climate  and  expand  government  bureaucracy  by  creating  at  least  sixty
expensive new agencies and projects.25

Introduced in May 2010, the American Power Act includes a $7 billion
annual  “linked  fee”  to  be  added  to  gasoline  prices  to  “improve  US
transportation and efficiency.” The way it works is to have producers and
importers  of  gasoline  and  jet  fuel  buy  non-tradable  carbon  allowances
pegged  to  a  fixed  price  established  by  trading  auction  prices.  So,  is  this
actually referred to as a linked fee or tax? Of course not! But you probably
won’t  recognize  any  difference  when  you  pay  the  added  costs  at  the  gas
pump.  In  addition,  $2  billion  has  been  allocated  per  year  for  researching

2

and developing effective carbon capture and sequestration methods—kind
of  like  creating  a  GITMO  for  dangerous  carbon  terrorist  provocateurs.  In
addition,  there’s  a  new  multibillion-dollar  revenue  stream  for  agriculture
through a carbon-offset program. Should someone inform the sponsors that
tilling soil releases deadly CO
 … not to mention the increased flatulence
hazards associated with livestock?

Recognizing  that  bill  enactment  will  send  costs  soaring,  the  legislation
will “provide assistance to those Americans who may be disproportionately
affected by potential increases in energy prices.” Do you suppose they are
referring to taxpayers?

The frenetic efforts of Democrats to pass ObamaCare have drained the
will of many of their congressional minions to fall on their political spears
in another controversial war. The original Climate and Energy Bill has been
plagued by delays caused in part by repeated rewrites attempting to keep
green groups and key industry players on board during a time of growing
reelection anxiety. Cap-and-tax, by any name, also competes for attention
with  other  front-and-center  Obama-Biden  administration  priorities,  most
particularly  immigration  reform.  Another  reform—  namely,  reckless
spending—demands even greater attention.

Corporate Carbon-Capping Collaborators

 

Many  might  be  surprised  to  learn  of  large  corporations  that  would
ordinarily be assumed to be on the economic losing end of GHG emission
regulation actually supporting it. Why would that be? Granted, we should
assume  that  their  leaders,  stockholders,  and  employees  care  about
environmental stewardship regardless of whether or not they subscribe to
the  CO
  demonization  hype.  But  what  about  responding  to  the  fiduciary
bottom  line?  How  does  that  factor  in?  Let’s  consider  some  possible
examples.

Many  of  these  organizations  are  members  of  the  US  Climate  Action
Partnership (USCAP), a lobbying organization with more than thirty large
corporate and nonprofit members that are pushing hard for federal cap-and-
trade  legislation.  Participants  include  Alcoa;  major  automobile,  electrical,
and chemical companies; and oil corporations.26

2

Alcoa, an early USCAP participant, has implemented successful energy
conservation programs, driven by good business planning, which have also
reduced GHG emissions through expanded use of recycled materials. This
is because aluminum produced from recycled metal requires only about 5
percent as much energy to manufacture as the energy required to produce
primary aluminum, and nearly 70 percent of all aluminum ever produced is
still in use today.

Perhaps Alcoa might have originally hoped to be able to receive emission
credits for GHGs they are “not” emitting through their normal and laudable
profit-seeking activity by pushing the time reference baseline back to 1990
(as Kyoto did). In short, the company would have been eligible for windfall
trading  profits  on  top  of  profits  it  has  already  realized  through  efficient
business  practices  since  1990.  This  would  enable  other  companies  that
exceed their allotments to purchase Alcoa’s credits without expensive fixes.
And even if they didn’t succeed, USCAP membership would give them a
seat  at  the  negotiating  table.  If  so,  can  we  really  blame  them?  Yet  at  the
same time, how, exactly, will this reduce total GHH emissions, much less
really influence climate for the better?

After it merged with Cinergy, Duke Energy joined USCAP in May 2005.
Cinergy  was  a  company  that,  much  like  Alcoa,  had  accomplished  97
percent  emission  reductions  as  a  result  of  implementing  major  efficiency
improvements in its overwhelmingly coal-fired electric generating stations.
Its $1.94 million investment in efficiency upgrades reduced CO
 emissions
by 349,882 tons, at a cost of $1.11 per ton. If early action credits provided
by Phase I of the Climate Stewardship Act (originally proposed in 2003 by
senators  John  McCain  (R-AZ)  and  Joe  Lieberman  (I-CT);  a  new  version
was  introduced  in  2005)  were  applied—valuing  the  credits  at  $15/ton  in
2010  and  $45/ton  in  2025—Cinergy  might  reap  windfall  profits  between
1,263 and 3,990 percent. Not a bad investment.27

2

2

2

DuPont  invested  $50  million  in  the  late  1990s  to  reduce  nitrous  oxide
(N
O)  emissions  from  its  production  of  adipic  acid,  a  chemical  used  to
produce  nylon.  N
O  is  a  gas  with  roughly  310  times  the  greenhouse
warming potential of CO
. By 2000, DuPont had reduced these emissions
by 63 percent over a 1990 base year (56.2 million metric tons on a CO
-
equivalent basis). Assuming that DuPont was awarded a tradable allocation
of 90 percent of its 1990 emissions at an average market price of $10/metric
ton,  its  reductions  by  2000  would  yield  more  than  900  percent  return  on

2

2

investment. DuPont sold the nylon business to Invest in 2004, terminating
its ownership of related emission credits, but DuPont has since eliminated
emissions  from  a  refrigerant  with  even  greater  greenhouse  warming
potential as an unintended by-product of another process change that might
compensate for that lost opportunity.28

It is very clear that some companies would richly benefit from laws and
regulations that drive up the price of carbon and that mandate or subsidize
wind and solar power. For example, General Electric would gain expanded
markets  in  such  areas  as  manufacture  of  wind  turbines,  solar  panels,
electricity  grid  modernization,  nuclear  reactors,  natural  gas  turbines,  and
other energy production projects representing hundreds of billions of dollars
in worldwide sales in coming years.

Carbon caps would also help GE market “greener” products through its
ecoimagination  line  of  appliances  as  energy  costs  escalate.  The  company
spent  $7.6  million  to  lobby  for  favorable  legislation  during  the  second
quarter  of  2009  alone.  Again,  GE’s  energy  conservation  innovations  and
profitability are very good things for everyone and are all accomplishable in
free market competition based upon merit, and at lower costs to consumers
and taxpayers.29

PG&E’s  interests  as  a  significant  hydroelectric  and  nuclear  company
would  be  similar  to  GE’s.  They  would  benefit  as  alternative  energy
(including  nuclear)  sources  become  more  cost  competitive  with
skyrocketing fossil-fuel energy prices. Yet those escalating costs will occur
in  any  case.  GHG  legislation  will  only  make  them  higher,  with
disproportionately  heavy  burdens  falling  upon  those  who  can  least  afford
them.

How  would  automotive  companies  benefit  from  cap-and-trade?  Higher
fuel costs will motivate many people to purchase new, more efficient cars
and  trucks.  So  again,  that’s  a  good  thing,  which  an  increasingly  cash-
strapped and conservation-minded public will do in any case. A good case
can be made for government corporate average fuel economy, or CAFE for
short,  standards  aimed  at  boosting  vehicle  mileage  efficiency  without
artificially raising fuel costs based on a bogus climate crisis platform. But
bucking Obama-Biden administration agendas is not an option so long as
the  government  continues  to  assert  unprecedented  control  over  their
businesses.

The former British Petroleum was a USCAP member, but it has recently
dropped out after losing many incentives. BP has been spending millions of
dollars  in  television  ads  featuring  ordinary-looking  folks  wondering  why
the  energy  industry  hasn’t  thought  about  switching  to  cleaner  natural
sources  “because  they  work.”  But  apparently  these  ads  haven’t  been
working  very  well  for  Europe’s  second  largest  fully  publicly  traded
company’s bottom line. In February 2008, BP’s new CEO mentioned  that
the oil giant might off-load part or all of its Green Business Unit, valued at
between $5–$7 billion, and drop its “Beyond Petroleum” slogan, which was
based  primarily  upon  portfolio  investments  rather  than  actual  business
activities. Environmental critics have long been arguing that this had been
nothing more than a marketing gimmick anyway.30

The  London-based  company  has  a  history  of  very  large  environmental
PR problems to overcome. One was an oil spill attributed to poor pipeline
maintenance  that  leaked  more  than  200,000  gallons  of  crude  oil  onto  the
Arctic  tundra  at  BP’s  Prudhoe  Bay,  Alaska,  oil  field  and  led  to  a  partial
shutdown.  Another  was  a  refinery  explosion  at  its  Texas  City,  Texas,
refinery  that  killed  fifteen  workers  and  injured  at  least  170,  also  blamed
upon  cost-cutting-related  maintenance  and  safety  deficiencies.  Most
recently,  the  massive  offshore  oil  spill  disaster  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,
beginning in late April 2010, put the entire oil drilling industry in economic
jeopardy.  The  company  was  forced  to  continue  cost-cutting  measures,
primarily through restructuring, to close its business gap with rivals Royal
Dutch Shell and ExxonMobil.31

Conoco  Phillips  and  heavy  equipment  maker  Caterpillar  joined  BP  in
announcing  in  February  2010  that  they  won’t  renew  their  USCAP
memberships. This may be a continuing trend as more and more companies
recognize  that  diminishing  public  alarm  about  global  warming,  coupled
with growing concern about energy costs, makes carbon-capping legislation
less  likely.  This  skepticism  is  growing  at  a  time  when  climate  science
scandal revelations are becoming routine and Republicans are expected to
gain seats in Congress. Although the Obama administration worked hard to
persuade  industry  groups  to  back  cap-and-trade  initiatives  after  the
Democrats’  big  2008  wins,  the  political  value  of  seats  at  the  government
negotiating table appears to have depreciated. Still, according to Whitney
Stanco, a policy analyst for Concept Capital, “The saying in Washington is
that if you’re not at the table, you’re on the menu.”32

Winston  Churchill  advocated  a  similar  political  survival  strategy.  He
described an appeaser as “one who feeds a crocodile, hoping it will eat him
last.”

BP and Conoco Phillips spokespeople maintain that the companies will
continue to support legislation to reduce greenhouse emissions; they’ll just
be working outside USCAP’s umbrella. Caterpillar prudently maintains that
it  will  continue  to  promote  green  technologies,  although  it  is  unlikely  to
abandon its large coal industry equipment business interests anytime soon.
Still, these decisions to withdraw from USCAP may reflect the beginning of
a broader corporate climate change.33

ExxonMobil  has  encountered  enormous  criticism  and  pressure  for  not
jumping  on  the  climate  crisis  bandwagon  early  enough  and  shifting  its
business  emphasis  toward  alternative  energy.  During  a  May  2008  annual
meeting,  the  company’s  chairman  and  CEO,  Rex  Tillerson,  defeated  a
shareholder  effort  led  by  some  of  founder  John  D.  Rockefeller’s
descendants to force the issue through four nonbinding proxy resolutions.
One  called  for  taking  away  one  of  his  job  titles  to  split  the  company’s
leadership. Another, which also failed, urged that more attention be directed
to studying effects of global warming and development of renewable energy
technologies.34

At  a  press  conference  following  the  meeting,  Mr.  Tillerson  was  asked
about  the  global  warming  issue  and  replied,  “My  view  is  that  climate
change policy is so important to the world that to not have a debate on it is
irresponsible. We don’t know everything about it. Nobody has figured this
out. We have to understand that climate change policy, whatever it turns out
to be, is going to hurt some people. But let’s at least have an open debate
about it, so everybody knows what the facts are.”35

It might be noted that while ExxonMobil hadn’t tended to publicize its
actions to advance that understanding until quite recently, it has donated at
least  $100  million  to  Stanford  University’s  Global  Climate  and  Energy
Project. The company also provides funds to support the National Academy
of Sciences.36

Carbon-Capping Costs

 

2

Enactment of cap-and-trade (aka climate and energy) legislation urged
by the Obama administration will have costly consequences. At the time of
this writing, the latest definitive rendition of this initiative was presented in
the  American  Clean  Energy  and  Security  Act  of  2009  (aka  the  Waxman-
Markey  Bill),  which  narrowly  gained  approval 
the  House  of
in 
Representatives on June 27, 2009, by a vote of 219 to 212.

In June 2009, the CBO released its analysis that Waxman-Markey would
cost  citizens  only  $175  per  household  annually.  This  was  based  upon  a
CBO  study  that  projected  a  CO
  emission  price  of  $28  per  ton  in  2020.
Included  were  escalating  projected  allowance  revenues  of  $119.7  billion,
$129.7 billion, $136 billion, $145.6 billion, and $152.9 billion for the years
2015–2019  as  CO
  caps  become  more  stringent.  However,  the  allowance
costs don’t really add up, because they do not account for such economic
costs  as  decreases  in  GDP  that  will  result  from  the  caps.  In  short,  it  was
only an accounting analysis, not an economic analysis—a fact reported in
the CBO report’s footnote.

A study by the Heritage Foundation’s Center for Data Analysis (CDA)
estimates that Waxman-Markey climate change legislation would cost $161
billion (2009 dollars) annually by 2020. For a family of four, this translates
into $1,870. The CDA also found that for all years cited, the average GDP
loss would be about $393 billion … more than double the 2020 hit to family
incomes. By 2035 (the last year analyzed by the CDA), annual GDP losses,
adjusted  for  inflation,  would  be  $6,790  per  family  .  .  .  and  that  is  before
they paid their $4,600 share of carbon taxes.

2

2

A study by the National Association of Manufacturers projects that CO
emission  caps—similar  to  63  percent  of  the  cuts  called  for  by  2020  by
Senate advocates— would reduce US GDP by up to $269 billion and result
in  the  loss  of  850,000  jobs  by  2014.  The  CDA  estimated  that  such
restrictions  would  produce  total  cumulative  GDP  losses  of  up  to  $4.8
trillion and annual employment losses of more than 500,000 jobs by 2030.

Still,  whatever  the  United  States  does,  it’s  going  to  be  exceedingly
difficult  to  keep  up  with  Europe  in  the  carbon  combat  crusade.  The
influential  Environmental  Audit  Committee  of  the  British  Parliament
advocated that every adult be required to use a “carbon ration card” when
he or she pays for petrol, airline tickets, and household energy. Those who
exceed their designated entitlements would then have to pay for what are
called  “top-up  credits”  from  others  who  haven’t  used  up  all  of  their

allowances.  The  amount  charged  would  be  handled  through  a  “specialist
company.”

As Member of Parliament Tim Yeo, a Tory and a leading promoter of the
plan,  stated,  “We  found  that  personal  carbon  trading  has  real  potential  to
engage  the  population  in  the  fight  against  climate  change  and  to  achieve
significant emission reductions in a progressive way.”37

Therein  lies  an  opportunity  for  the  Brits  to  rewrite  a  famous  statement
presented  by  Winston  Churchill  regarding  a  different  war  to  now  say:
“Seldom have so many done so much for so little.” 38

Caps, Crooks, and Cops in the EU

Experiences across Western Europe prove that huge cap-and-tax profits,
combined with vast operational complexities, present enticing temptations
for fraud. Europol, the European criminal intelligence agency, reported that
emission trading system fraud resulted in about €5 billion in lost revenues
during  2009,  as  carbon  traders  schemed  to  avoid  paying  Europe’s  value
added  tax  (VAT)  and  pocket  the  difference.  The  agency  estimated  that  as
much as 90 percent of Europe’s carbon trades involved fraudulent activity.
Oscar  Reyes,  of  a  watchdog  group  called  Carbon  Trade  Watch,  observed
that “carbon markets are highly susceptible to fraud, given their complexity
and the fact that it’s not always clear what is being traded.”39

Twenty-five people were recently arrested in raids by British and German
authorities as part of a crackdown on carbon credit VAT avoidance. Raids
on  eighty-one  offices  and  homes  nabbed  thirteen  people  in  England  and
eight  in  Scotland.  German  officials  raided  230  locations,  including  the
headquarters of Deutsche Bank in Frankfurt and the offices of RWE, one of
Europe’s largest energy firms. Maybe there’s a lesson in this for Congress:
Don’t count on big business enterprises built on hot air to share windfall
profits with taxpayers.

 

 

Endangerment: End Run of Congress

But  who  needs  the  US  Congress  to  protect  the  planet  from  CO
emissions?  The  Obama-Biden  administration  has  warned  that  it  can

2

accomplish the same goal by applying the EPA’s recent CO
 Endangerment
Finding under the Clean Air Act if Congress doesn’t act. Now Lisa Jackson,
the  EPA  administrator  who  seemed  perfectly  willing  to  implement  the
ruling, is discovering that the EPA may need to contend with congressional
warnings  about  doing  so  after  all,  following  an  outcry  from  some
Democratic members along with state regulators.

2

2

Eight  Senate  Democrats  wrote  to  Jackson  expressing  concerns  about
potential  economic  and  energy  impacts  of  the  policy,  and  dozens  of  state
regulators  argued  that  they  didn’t  have  adequate  staffs  to  handle  the
expected  influx  of  new  permits.  Industry  officials  joined  the  resistance
movement, pointing out that the new regulations will be overly burdensome
to many energy-intensive sectors, such as steel production and cement kilns
that rely upon coal-fired energy.40 Senator Lisa Murkowski (R-AK) filed a
“resolution  of  disapproval”  regarding  the  EPA’s  abuse  of  authority  and
prospective  impacts  upon  the  nation’s  economy.  Senator  Jay  Rockefeller
(D-WV)  introduced  a  bill  that  would  put  a  2-year  freeze  on  the  EPA’s
ability to regulate greenhouse GHGs from power plants.41

Bowing to pressure, Jackson agreed to delay subjecting large greenhouse
GHG  emitters,  such  as  power  plants  and  crude  oil  refineries,  to  new
regulations until 2011. She also agreed to raise the threshold for using the
Clean Air Act to regulate CO
 emissions, stating, “I expect the threshold for
permitting  will  be  substantially  higher  than  the  25,000-ton  limit  that  the
EPA originally proposed.”42

Now,  the  EPA  is  once  again  proceeding  with  GHG  regulation  plans.
Beginning  July  of  2011,  permits  issued  for  all  new  facilities  with
greenhouse  gas  emissions  of  at  least  100,000  tons  per  year  and
modifications to existing businesses that will increase emissions by at least
75,000 tons per year must demonstrate use of best available technology to
minimize GHGs. How, exactly, that technology is defined remains unclear,
and that uncertainty discourages essential investment.43

Led  by  the  US  Chamber  of  Commerce,  several  states  and  large
businesses are launching dozens of legal challenges to block the EPA power
grab. Yet these cases are still in their preliminary stages and are unlikely to
bring about any relief before the regulations are enacted, if ever.

Senator Inhofe reported that “Lisa Jackson, Obama’s EPA administrator,
admitted  to  me  publicly  that  the  EPA  based  its  action  today  (issuing  the
findings) in good measure on the findings of the UN’s Intergovernmental

Panel  on  Climate  Change,  or  IPCC.  She  told  me  that  the  EPA  accepted
those findings without any serious independent analysis to see if they were
true.”44

On June 10, 2010, the US Senate voted 53–47 against banning the EPA
from  regulating  carbon  without 
the  consent  of  Congress.  Senator
Rockefeller (WV) sided with the losing GOP voters, along with his fellow
Democrats Mary Landrieu (LA), Evan Bayh (IN), Mark Pryor (AR), Ben
Nelson (NE), and Blanche Lincoln (AR).

While some companies would get very rich through implementation of
capand-trade  or  EPA  endangerment  rules,  millions  of  businesses  and
families would pay dearly. More than thirty states depend upon coal for 35
to  98  percent  of  their  electricity.  All  rely  upon  oil  and  natural  gas.  As
recognized by the US Chamber of Commerce, an organization that is vocal
on  such  matters,  such  regulations  will  have  burdensome  impacts  upon
energy  costs;  will  ship  needed  jobs  overseas;  and  will  shackle  living
standards and civil rights for most American citizens.

Chapter 8

CLIMATE AS RELIGION

Vapors  rise  as  /  Fever  settles  on  an  acid  sea  /  Neptune’s  bones
dissolve  /  Snow  glides  from  the  mountain  /  Ice  fathers  floods  fora
season / A hard rain comes quickly / Then dirt is parched

—Al Gore

Global warming has become a religious mantra, a call to action in
a  crusade  against  larger  evils  we  have  perpetrated  against  nature,  a
punishment for our sins. Author Michael Crichton articulated the essence of
that creed in a 2003 speech that draws a parallel with the Judeo-Christian
belief system: “There’s an initial Eden, a paradise, a state of grace and unity
with Nature; there’s a  fall  from  grace  into  a  state  of  pollution  as  a  result
from eating from the tree of knowledge; and as a result of our actions, there
is a judgment day coming for all of us. We are energy sinners, doomed to
die,  unless  we  seek  salvation,  which  is  now  called  sustainability.

Sustainability is salvation in the church of the environment. Just as organic
food is its communion, that pesticide-free wafer that the right people with
the right beliefs imbibe.”1

Michael Crichton was not arguing against the importance of living more
environmentally responsible lives that apply resources in more sustainable
ways. He was talking about doing this with intelligence that is less clouded
by emotion, which can impair judgment.

The  temple  of  global  warming  is  built  upon  religious  rather  than
scientific foundations. Climate change is not Mother Nature’s punishment
for our human audacity to multiply and survive, any more than a tornado
that  destroys  a  church  is  God’s  retribution  for  belonging  to  the  “wrong”
denomination. Get over it! It’s not all about us! Climate change is the way
nature  balances  itself,  moves  heat  around,  and  produces  motivations  for
species  to  evolve.  CO
  is  a  small  but  nonetheless  important  part  of  that
system. Without it, life would not exist at all. No polar bears, no penguins,
no coral reefs—and certainly no rain forests that directly breathe in lots of
the stuff. Don’t call it “pollution.”2 At least show it a little respect!

2

Fear Merchants

 

Religion  plays  an  important,  if  not  central,  role  in  most  of  our  lives,
whether  we  subscribe  to  a  particular  orthodoxy  or  not.  It  guides  us  to
believe  that  we  are  all  parts  of  something  much  larger  than  ourselves.  It
provides  lessons  that  encourage  us  to  live  cleaner,  use  resources  more
responsibly, and be nicer to all of nature’s creatures. Perhaps it’s really okay
if we need to be a bit frightened about the consequences of things we’re
doing  wrong  to  motivate  us  to  do  better.  But  don’t  we  expect  something
different from science? Isn’t it supposed to tell us real facts about what it
doesn’t  know  as  well  as  teach  us  what  it  has  actually  learned?  When
“science” emulates religion, it oversteps its bounds, and we can no longer
trust  it.  And  in  the  case  of  global  warming,  science  has  overstepped  its
bounds. Nobel Physics laureate Ivar Giaever calls global warming “a new
religion.”3

Many global warming zealots apparently envision life in Earth’s distant
past  as  an  Eden  with  idyllic  conditions.  Those  were  the  good  old  days
before  industrialization  and  modern  technology  wrecked  everything.  Yet

realities going back a hundred years and more reveal a different picture: one
displaying widespread poverty, starvation, disease, and hardship. Yes, and
throughout human history, people have had to adapt to climate changes—
some  long,  some  severe,  and  often  unpredictable.  They  have  blamed
themselves for bad seasons, believing they had invoked the displeasure of
the gods through a large variety of offenses. High priests of doom told them
so,  extracting  oaths  of  fealty  and  offerings  of  penance  for  promised
interventions on their behalf. In this regard, at least for some, it seems little
has changed.

Media networks, politicians, and other headline grabbers readily buy into
doomsday pronouncements, offering them up as packaged sound bite–sized
news  flashes,  and  competition  for  audiences  and  advertising  revenues  is
fierce. Unfortunately, many voices we have previously trusted have become
too busy, biased, or indifferent to check the data. Or sometimes they may be
disinclined to do so because the “facts” are just too juicy to pass up when
facing a ratings war.

Global warming has been effectively marketed as newsworthy because it
provides  really  exciting  visuals:  icebergs  calving,  polar  bears  exhausted
from  swimming,  and  such.  Endless  authorities  will  back  these  images  up
with speculations regarding just how bad things are likely to get. Included
are  wild  projections  of  climate  futures  based  upon  unproven  theories  and
computer models, along with speculative estimates of past temperatures that
are to be accepted as articles of faith.

More from Gore

 

Al  Gore  and  other  perhaps  less  divinely  inspired  modern-day  Noahs
continue to speak out about an imminent threat of floods posed by rising
ocean  levels  resulting  from  melting  ocean  and  glacier  ice.  The  “Goracle”
carried on his prophetic ministry at the Copenhagen conference, declaring
an  impending  Arctic  disaster.  Citing  new  research  undertaken  at  the  US
Navy’s Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, California, Mr. Gore told
attendees,  “These  figures  are  fresh.  Some  of  the  models  suggest  to  Dr.
[Wieslaw] Maslowski that there is a 75 percent chance the entire north polar
ice  cap,  during  the  summer  months,  could  be  completely  ice-free  within

Predictions of Arctic ice collapse are not new, ranging from warnings in
2008 that the “North Pole may be ice-free for the first time this summer”
and “the entire polar ice cap will disappear this summer.” Much of this was
based  upon  satellite  data  provided  by  the  National  Snow  and  Ice  Data
Center showing that Arctic ice was rapidly disappearing back toward a low
2007 level. Yet the August 2008 ice coverage was approximately 10 percent
greater  than  it  had  been  the  same  month  in  2007.  Fast-paced  freezing  in
November  2007  followed  the  rapid  rate  of  melting  observed  during
September  and  October.  NASA’s  Earth  Observatory  images  reveal  that
some  58,000  square  miles  of  ice  formed  for  10  days  in  late  October  and
early November, a new record. Nevertheless, the extent of sea ice recorded
in  November  was  still  well  shy  of  the  median  observed  over  a  25-year
period between 1979 and 2003.5

According  to  NASA  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  data,  global  sea  ice
expanses in January 2009 approximately equaled those in 1979, and Arctic
ice  realized  a  substantial  recovery.  Bill  Chapman,  a  researcher  at  the
University  of  Illinois  Arctic  Center,  reported  that  this  was  due  in  part  to
colder  temperatures  and  also  because  wind  patterns  were  weaker.  Strong
winds can slow ice formation and force ice into warmer waters where it will
melt.6

five to seven years . . . It is hard to capture the astonishment that the experts
in the science of ice felt when they saw this.”4

Scientists  were  astonished  by  Gore’s  statements.  One  was  none  other
than Dr. Maslowski himself, who responded, “It’s unclear to me how the
figure was arrived at… I would never try to estimate likelihood at anything
as exact as this.” Mr. Gore’s office later admitted that the 75 percent figure
was one used by Dr. Maslowski as a “ballpark figure” several years ago in a
conversation with Mr. Gore.

In  November  2009,  the  average  rate  of  Arctic  sea  ice  growth  slightly
exceeded  the  1979–2000  average  growth  rate  for  the  month,  although  at
month’s end, some regions, including the Barents Sea and Hudson Bay, had
less  ice  cover  than  normal.  Both  Hudson  Bay  and  the  Barents  Sea
experienced  a  slow  freeze-up  during  fall  2009,  reportedly  caused  by
different and very complex interactions among the sea ice, the atmosphere,
and the ocean.7

Religious  history  is  replete  with  stories  of  floods,  from  Noah  to
Gilgamesh.  But  melting  and  freezing  patterns  are  far  too  complex  and

2

regional  to  be  predicted  by  models.  In  addition,  accurate  satellite  records
only  recently  became  available,  and  those  changes  have  not  been  in
lockstep with either global temperature or CO

 concentration trends.

Knee-jerk responses to alarmist forecasts make for great media, but they
do so at the expense of good science. If claims that continuous Greenland
melting accelerations were correct, even at previously measured advancing
rates it would take thousands of years to significantly affect sea levels. And
a study presented in the July 2008 issue of the journal Science notes that
Greenland’s melt rate may actually be decreasing when viewed over a long
timescale.  This  research,  led  by  Dr.  Roderick  S.  W.  van  de  Wal  of  the
Institute for Marine and Atmospheric Research in Utrecht, is based upon 17
years of satellite measurements. It concludes that speedups in melting rates
are  strictly  short-term,  transient  phenomena,  occurring  primarily  during
summer months.8

Global Warming and Traffic

 

As  noted  in  earlier  chapters,  Dr.  James  Hansen,  a  high  priest  of  the
climate  change  religion,  continues  to  produce  much  media  flood  fodder.
You  will  most  likely  see  his  name  attached  to  any  widely  circulated
headline reports of Greenland ice melting at alarming rates and of sea-level
rise  predictions 
that  make  IPCC’s  seem  extremely  comforting  by
comparison.  Hansen  also  continues  to  stay  very  busy  with  television  and
magazine interviews and public lectures outside his official NASA duties,
obviously unfettered by constraints imposed by any government officials on
his free speech. An April 14, 2008, Newsweek  lead  cover  article,  “Who’s
the  Greenest  of  Them  All?”  (referring  to  presidential  candidates),  quotes
him as having observed, “Anything beyond 350 parts per million of carbon
dioxide threatens widespread global melting and rise of sea levels. We are
at 385 and counting.”9

Hansen  continues  to  be  convinced  that  a  climate  crisis  is  upon  us,
warning that warming during the summer of 2009 has pushed the climate
system toward tipping points that will lead to irreversible and catastrophic
effects.  He  had  previously  gained  headline  media  coverage  when  he
declared  that  October  2008  was  the  warmest  on  record  for  that  month.
NASA  later  corrected  that  record  after  Hansen  was  caught  fudging  the

numbers. NOAA’s registration of 63 snowfall records and 115 lowest-ever
temperatures  for  October  ranked  2008  as  only  the  70th  warmest  in  114
years.  As  Christopher  Booker  wrote  in  the  UK’s  Daily  Telegraph,  “The
reason  for  the  freak  figures  [presented  by  Hansen]  was  that  scores  of
temperature  records  from  Russia  and  elsewhere  weren’t  based  upon
October records at all. Figures from the previous month had been carried
over for two months running.”10

Some recent e-mail messages obtained by Christopher Horner, a senior
fellow  at  the  Competitive  Enterprise  Institute,  through  the  Freedom  of
Information Act call into question the reliability of climate data applied by
NASA’s  GISS,  which  Hansen  heads.  Even  some  top  NASA  scientists
apparently considered the climate dataset produced by GISS to be inferior
to  data  maintained  by  the  University  of  East  Anglia’s  CRU.  In  fact,  they
often  depended  upon  CRU  data.  The  GISS  data  was  also  regarded  to  be
inferior  to  that  provided  by  the  National  Climatic  Data  Center’s  Global
Historical  Climatology  Network,  whose  information  had  been  given
directly  to  a  reporter  from  USA  Today  in  August  2007  but  was  never
published.11

Hansen’s  past  predictions  haven’t  all  proven  to  be  divinely  inspired.
During an interview in 2001, he was asked to predict how global warming
would affect the scene outside his New York City GISS office building 20
years hence. Gazing out of his upper-level window onto the area below, he
said, “Well, there will be more traffic.” Then he went on to say, “The West
Side  Highway  [which  runs  along  the  Hudson  River]  will  be  underwater.
And there will be tape across the windows across the street because of high
winds. And the same birds won’t be there. The trees in the median strip will
change.”  Then  he  added,  “There  will  be  more  police  cars.”  When  asked
why, he explained, “Well, you know what happens to crime when the heat
goes up.”12 At least he was right about the traffic.

Skeptical Judgments

 

The  climate  change  believers  have  launched  what  amounts  to  an
aggressive jihad against those who have differing opinions. Results of that
climate war have brought great injustice to individuals who disagree, have
hampered  sensible  dialogue  and  debate,  and  have  produced  government

policies guided by emotion and fear rather than by balanced reasoning and
sound judgments.

One tactic used to defame those who don’t subscribe to global warming
crisis hysteria is to associate disbelievers with those who have turned their
backs  on  true  villainy.  For  example,  when  television  commentator  Scott
Pelley was asked in a March 23, 2006, CBS PublicEye blog post why he
didn’t interview anyone who didn’t agree that global warming is a threat, he
compared  scientists  who  are  skeptical  about  human-caused  catastrophic
climate change to Holocaust deniers: “If I do an interview with [Holocaust
survivor]  Elie  Wiesel,  am  I  required  as  a  journalist  to  find  a  Holocaust
denier?”13

David Roberts, a regular contributor to Grist, a prominent environmental
news and commentary blog site, carried the denier Holocaust theme even
farther.  Referring  to  the  “denial  industry,”  he  stated  that  we  should  have
“war crime trials for these bastards—some sort of climate Nuremberg.”14

An  Australian  columnist  agrees  with  Roberts,  proposing  that  climate
change denial should be outlawed: “David Irving is under arrest in Australia
for  Holocaust  denial.  Perhaps  there  is  a  case  for  making  climate  change
denial an offence—it is a crime against humanity after all.”15

IPCC’s top scientist and chairman, Rajendra Pachauri, goes beyond the
Holocaust to compare the views of global warming deniers with those of
Hitler himself. Referring to the well-known global warming skeptic Bjorn
Lomborg,  Pachauri  stated,  “Where  is  the  difference  between  Lomborg’s
view on humans and Hitler’s? You cannot treat people like cattle.”16

With regard to IPCC’s scientific objectivity, that pretty much says it all.

Eco-Evangelism

 

In  the  church  of  climate  change,  most  or  all  unfortunate  events  that
occur on our planet are attributed to human causation. Eco-elitist crusaders
argue that economic growth, promulgated by large corporate interests, is the
enemy  of  the  environment.  They  overlook  the  fact  that  global  economic
progress  yields  technological  innovations  and  prosperity  essential  to
support more resourceful, cleaner, and healthier lifestyles. A return to the
small,  self-sufficient,  agrarian  communal  societies  of  our  ancestors  is  no

2

longer practical or desirable, either for us or for the ecosystems we depend
upon.

Environmental  evangelism  has  been  a  unifying  influence  in  a  wide
variety  of  other  non-climate-related  initiatives  with  mixed  cost-benefit
results.17 Do you remember the huge amount of attention during the 1970s
and  1980s  that  surrounded  the  issue  of  acid  rain  damage  to  lakes  and
forests, which was attributed to industrial SO
 emissions from Midwestern
utilities?18  And  did  you  ever  hear  about  the  results  of  a  more-than-half-a-
billion-dollar,  10-year-long  National  Acid  Precipitation  Assessment
Program study that was initiated in 1980 to research the matter?19 Probably
not.

As it turned out, those fears of widespread damage proved to be largely
unfounded, since only one species of tree at a high elevation suffered any
notable  effect,  and  acidity  in  lakes  was  traced  to  natural  causes.  The
scientists  reported  that  they  had  “turned  up  no  smoking  gun”;  that  the
problem was far more complicated than had been thought; that other factors
combine to harm trees; and that sorting out cause and effect is difficult and
in  some  cases  impossible.  As  Robert  Bruck,  a  North  Carolina  State
University  plant  pathologist  who  worked  on  the  project,  observed,  “If
you’re  environmentally  oriented,  you’re  going  to  find  things  to  be
concerned about; if you’re one who finds no reason to get excited, you’ll
find much to support that, too.”20 Is this beginning to sound familiar?

2

Although  the  Reagan-Bush  administration  refused  to  sponsor  any  acid
rain  legislation  before  the  results  were  in,  a  regulatory  groundwork  had
already  been  established  within  the  EPA,  with  many  new  careers  in  the
balance.  So,  although  the  acid  rain  threat  had  been  demonstrably
overblown,  pressures  upon  the  George  H.  W.  Bush  administration  added
 emission restrictions within new Clean Air Act regulations. The
costly SO
IPCC, along with other scientific organizations, now recognize SO
 as a gas
that counteracts atmospheric greenhouse warming effects— though few on
either side of the global warming debate are likely to argue that this is a
worthwhile benefit to be encouraged.21

Knee-jerk  environmental  legislation  likewise  poses  unforeseen  political
and  other  hazards.  An  example  is  a  cap-and-trade  regulatory  mechanism
proposed  under  the  Clean  Air  Act  of  2005  by  the  George  W.  Bush
administration to reduce sources of mercury pollution 29 percent by 2010,
ramping up to 79 percent by 2018. Mercury is universally recognized to be

2

a  highly  toxic  health  hazard,  and  although  the  reduction  cost  to  the
electricity industry (principally transferred to consumers) is estimated to be
$2 billion or more, general public support appears to be strong. Yet even
though  such  regulations  have  not  previously  existed,  some  environmental
groups are critical, demanding that such cuts are not nearly enough, arguing
that the “weak” plan is a conspiracy to hurt our nation’s children.22

In February 2008, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia Circuit Court ruled that the EPA-endorsed “Clean Air Mercury
Rule”  was  invalid  because  a  cap-and-trade  program  would  enable  power
plants that fail to meet emission targets to buy credits from plants that did,
rather than having to install their own mercury emission controls. Seventeen
states  argued  that  the  cap-and-trade  approach  would  endanger  children
living near power plants that couldn’t comply by “doing it legally.” If this
were  the  case,  why  would  cap-and-trade  legislation  for  CO
  emission
allowances be any different? That certainly appears to be a problem in most
countries that signed on to Kyoto Protocol emission targets.23

2

Another  ironic  twist  and  turn  in  the  mercury  regulation  saga  revolves
around new US government legislation that will phase out use of traditional
incandescent  bulbs  in  2012,  replacing  them  with  more  energy-efficient
compact fluorescent lighting (CFL) that contains mercury. Many argue that
the  resulting  environmental  and  health  costs  will  cancel  out  the  benefits
realized  through  energy  conservation.  While  advocates  argue  that  the
mercury content in a single CFL bulb is relatively low, comparable to that
in watch batteries and tilt thermostats, a difference is that these items don’t
tend  to  shatter  when  accidentally  dropped.  Critics  argue  that  as  federal
legislation  continues  to  push  CFLs  into  home  use,  exposures  will  add  up
over time, with increased risks to the health of babies, children, pregnant
women, the elderly, and those in poor health.

Disposal of spent bulbs will present large cleanup costs, and those that
end  up  in  landfills  will  leak  mercury  into  the  air  and  groundwater.  A
spokesman for General Electric, a major CFL producer, admitted that even
a little mercury in each bulb will add up to a big problem when sales really
expand. Huge amounts of mercury will also enter the global environment
from  factories  in  China  and  other  nations  where  pollution  control
regulations are much more lax or nonexistent.24

Conscience of an Environmentalist

 

Environmentalists  are  almost  universally  motivated  by  love  and
reverence toward nature, vital concerns about our impacts upon planet Earth
and its ecosystems, and a strong sense of responsibility regarding the legacy
we  leave  for  generations  who  will  follow.  These  basic  priorities  are  not
founded upon specific scientific theories or beliefs; rather, they are founded
upon shared values that fundamentally define and guide our most evolved
human qualities. Included are our abilities to reason objectively, to create
innovative solutions that make things better, and to learn from mistakes that
occur even when we mean well.25

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  environmental  issues  have  captured
mainstream public consciousness, and so they should. Just look at the recent
explosion  of  protective  legislative  initiatives,  government-  and  corporate-
sponsored climate research funding, and tax-supported investments in green
energy  technologies.  People  of  all  backgrounds,  including  scientists,
politicians,  and  regular  folks,  are  passionate  about  such  matters.  Those
passions have yielded urgent and beneficial changes along with some very
costly lessons.

The  beginning  of 

the  popular  “environmental  movement” 

is
conventionally  associated  with  a  virtual  tsunami  of  reaction  to  Rachel
Carson’s Silent Spring after it first appeared in 1962. Endorsed by Supreme
Court Justice William O. Douglas, the book spent several weeks on the New
York  Times  best-seller  list  and  inspired  widespread  public  concerns
regarding human impacts upon the environment. Most particularly, it called
attention  to  a  thinning  of  the  eggshells  of  certain  bird  species  that
threatened  their  existence,  along  with  the  toxic  problems  throughout  the
food chain that resulted from indiscriminate crop spraying of the pesticide
DDT. Although now scientifically challenged, this claim is clearly credited
with a prohibition against DDT use in the United States since 1972, and a
similar ban in Europe.26

Because of threatened European trade restrictions against countries that
used  DDT,  African  nations  terminated  use  of  the  effective  mosquito
pesticide for malaria control. Since that time, death rates from the disease
have increased dramatically. The US Centers for Disease Control estimates
that between 155,000 and 310,000 people have died each year based upon
1997–2002 data tabulated at forty-one African sites. The vast majority of

these  victims  are  desperately  poor,  including  large  numbers  of  young
children  and  the  elderly,  who  are  especially  vulnerable.27  Arguably,  there
would have been millions fewer deaths if African nations had continued to
use  DDT.  How  does  anyone  compute  an  environmental  cost-benefit
assessment that factors in the intrinsic value of those lives?28

The malaria-DDT paradox presents an ironic connection to recent claims
by  some  that  global  warming  is  causing  mosquito  populations  to  expand
into  formerly  cooler  latitudes,  with  the  potential  of  producing  malaria
epidemics  in  various  parts  of  the  world.  Although  many  highly  informed
scientists  strongly  dispute  any  such  influence,  it  again  brings  pesticide
issues to the center stage of environmental debate.

Assuming  that  an  important  goal  of  environmental  policies  is  to  help
underdeveloped  and  developing  nations  gain  the  health  advantages
developed nations enjoy, perhaps a good way is to assist in lifting them out
of  poverty  and  pollution  through  modernization.  Yet  “environmentalists”
continue to block plans to construct hydropower dams in Africa and India
that  can  provide  clean  energy  needed  to  refrigerate  and  safely  preserve
food. Obstructionists who enjoy those essentials cite overriding ecological
concerns.29

Paul  Ehrlich’s  The  Population  Bomb,  published  in  1968,  was  one  of
several books that spread doom-and-gloom predictions attributed to human
pressures  on  the  environment.  It  projected  that  worldwide  crises  in  food
supply  and  natural  resource  availability  would  lead  to  major  famines  and
economic  failures  by  1990.  Ehrlich’s  predictions  were  based  upon  the
premise that while agricultural production was growing linearly, population
was expanding at a much faster and unsustainable geometric rate. What he
failed to consider is that as developing countries modernize, birth rates tend
to  fall,  and  agricultural  output  increases  even  faster  using  less  farmland.
The United States is a prime example.30

John Holdren, the Obama-Biden administration’s science and technology
czar, has been ordained as another high priest of climate calamity. Holdren
was an early protégé of Ehrlich and coauthored a book with him in 1977
titled  Ecoscience:  Population,  Resources,  Environment,  which  explored
measures  a  government  might  take  to  limit  population  growth  if  a
population  crisis  is  to  occur.  The  book  defended  the  constitutionality  of
compulsory abortion and sterilization, a topic reopened at the Copenhagen

climate  change  meeting  in  2009.  In  1986,  Holdren  declared  that  global
warming could cause the deaths of 1 billion people by 2020.

Mr.  Holden  also  holds  several  other  influential  White  House  positions:
assistant to the president for science and technology, director of the White
House  Office  of  Science  and  Technology  Policy,  and  cochair  of  the
President’s  Council  of  Advisors  on  Science  and  Technology.  Fortunately,
during  his  confirmation  hearings,  Holdren  stated  that  the  government
should not determine the optimum US population, and he now believes that
the  figure  of  1  billion  deaths  by  2020  is  “unlikely.”31  We  can  breathe  a
collective sigh of relief!

Holdren  is  a  strong  advocate  of  cap-and-trade  as  a  means  to  control
energy consumption, and he supported this strategy long before Al Gore got
windy on wind. In a paper released in 1995, Holdren explained his model
for sustainable development as one in which “humans are included as just
one  species  and  not  treated  specially.”32  Another  Holdren  sustainability
tenant  is  to  launch  “a  massive  campaign  to  restore  a  high-quality
environment  in  North  America  and  to  de-develop  the  United  States”;  to
achieve this end, he believes that “resources and energy must be diverted
from frivolous and wasteful uses in overdeveloped countries to filling the
genuine needs of underdeveloped countries.”33

Does  any  of  this  sound  familiar?  As  if  it  could  have  come  from  the
United  Nations  and  its  IPCC,  for  example?  Or  maybe  the  Karl  Marx
doctrine? Is it what we would expect the nation’s highest appointed science
and  technology  adviser  to  advocate?  Is  this  where  eco-evangelism  has
driven us? Has our ship of state drifted to a foreign port, or is this still the
United States of America?

Chapter 9

GETTING A REAL GRIP ON “GREEN “ ENERGY

Taking a closer look at alternatives.

The  United  States  is  facing  energy  challenges  that  can  only  get
worse.  It  is  clear  that  we  must  develop  and  exploit  all  reasonable
alternatives and also practice rational conservation measures as we observe
that  global  demand  increases,  readily  accessible  oil  and  gas  deposits
dwindle, competition for world supply accelerates, and costs rise. Equally
important is a need to curb regulatory obstruction of vital and time-critical
energy initiatives based on unwarranted assertions of moral and scientific

authority.  All  these  priorities  demand  trustworthy  public  information  and
leadership. Therein lie the greatest obstacles of all.

In  response  to  man-made  global  warming  and  foreign  oil  dependence
alarms,  many  companies  are  rushing  to  “green  up”  their  investment
portfolios,  advertising  images,  and  lobbying  campaigns.  And  they  are
realizing great successes, cheered on by a hopeful, grateful public and its
representatives.  After  all,  who  can  resist  the  tantalizing  allure  of  cleaner,
perpetually sustainable, unlimited new supplies of power and fuel that will
provide independence from unreliable, often unfriendly foreign sources?

Many are beginning to realize that most green expectations are oversold
and color-blind. Increasing numbers of skeptics and critics are challenging
the  actual  benefits  and  consequences  of  various  energy  choices.  Included
are  growing  numbers  of  taxpayers,  consumers,  and  more  than  a  few
environmental groups.1

Alternative  (aka  “green”)  energy  initiatives  are  receiving  rapidly
expanding  levels  of  arguably  well-justified  encouragement  and  support
through a variety of federal, state, and local incentive programs. Many tens
of billions of dollars have already been provided through such mechanisms
as  subsidies,  production  credits,  accelerated  depreciation  tax  credits,  and
public  funding  for  research.  As  of  February  2008,  twenty-five  states  plus
the  District  of  Columbia  have  instituted  mandatory  renewable  portfolio
standards (RPSs) that set timetables for increasing percentages of legislated
green  power  production.2  It  may  be  interesting  to  note,  however,  that  the
majority  of  government-owned  utilities  in  these  states  have  successfully
lobbied for reprieves from the costly, often unrealistic requirements.3

A  federal  Energy  Policy  Act  of  2005  authorized  by  the  US  Congress
mandates a biofuel RPS phase-in starting at 4 billion gallons in 2006 and
reaching 7.5 billion gallons by 2012.4 In December 2007, the US House of
Representatives  passed  another  RPS  requiring  all  investor-owned  utilities
(but not municipal systems and rural cooperatives) to obtain 2.75 percent of
their power from renewable sources by 2010 and 15 percent by 2020. The
Senate version rejected any RPS provision that would transfer wealth from
already distressed electricity customers to a heavily subsidized wind power
industry.

Consumers generally have no idea how expensive green power actually
is, because so much of the cost is passed on through taxpayer subsidies and
preferential  treatment  that  drives  conventional  power  prices  higher.  Even

with that invisible support, it still costs more than most utility customers are
willing to pay voluntarily. When public polls are taken asking people if they
would pay more for alternatives that are “better for the environment,” the
results  are  usually  overwhelmingly  positive.  Yet,  when  they  are  asked  to
actually sign up and pay more, their euphoria immediately disappears.

In addition to currently uncompetitive costs relative to coal, natural gas,
and nuclear for electricity, and oil for transportation, a major and long-term
green  energy  industry  problem  is  its  very  limited  practical  expansion
capacity.  Consider  that  alternatives  presently  account  for  only  about  6
percent  of  the  total  US  electrical  power  production  (half  of  that  from
hydropower). Wind power (about 0.5 percent of total electricity—less than
0.01  percent  of  total  energy)  is  the  only  alternative  with  a  prospect  for
significant  growth,  and  it  has  a  very  long  way  to  go  in  replacing
dependence upon fossils (about 72 percent of total electricity—75 percent
of  total  energy),  and  nuclear  (about  19  percent  of  total  electricity—11.5
percent of total energy). Hydropower (about 6.5 percent of total electricity
—0.33 percent of total energy) has little expansion capacity. Solar, which
currently  provides  only  about  0.01  percent  of  total  US  electricity—even
much less of total energy—isn’t a contender for a significant share of the
commercial market on the basis of either cost or capacity. Geothermal (less
than 0.5 percent of total electricity—negligible total energy) is even more
restricted, both economically and geographically, in terms of expansion.

In reality, renewable energy development has a long way to go before it
can even begin to significantly offset increasing demands, much less play
dominant supply roles. All combined, these alternatives currently provide
only  about  6  percent  of  US  total  energy,  with  the  vast  majority  of  that
amount split between hydropower and such biofuels as ethanol and wood.

It  is  essential  to  our  national  and  global  future  that  development  and
utilization  of  alternative  energy  sources  and  technologies  continue  and
grow.  This  includes  improvement  and  expansion  of  nuclear  power,  along
with  innovations  to  produce  cleaner  energy  from  coal  and  other  fossil
sources for which there is presently no practical substitute.

It is also vital that the public be made much better informed about the
comparative  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  all  alternatives,  and  that
public policy decisions at all government levels be more fully guided by the
facts.  Currently,  this  is  not  happening.  Performance  benefits  of  unproven
options,  such  as  cellulosic  ethanol,  have  been  asserted  but  not

demonstrated.  Expansion  capacities  of  various  alternative  energy  options
have  been  wildly  exaggerated  by  promoters,  leading  many  in  the  general
public to believe that abundant replacements for fossil sources are available,
but  are  being  neglected  by  the  energy  utilities  in  response  to  “big  oil”
interests.

It  is  not  useful  to  either  overestimate  those  capacities  or  underestimate
their costs and limitations. Both errors are prevalent in media and marketing
hype that tells us what we would really like to believe, namely, that there
are  simple,  Earth-friendly,  sustainable  answers  that  can  make  energy
problems  go  away.  Unfortunately,  this  is  not  the  case.  It  is  difficult  to
comprehend  how  miniscule  the  potential  capacities  of  these  so-called
renewable  sources  are  relative  to  the  colossal  amounts  of  energy  we  will
continue to require.

term  “green  energy”  has  become  meaningless  because 

the
environmental consequences of all alternatives have been ignored by some
and  aggressively  attacked  by  others.  Some  fossil-dependent  energy
resources have been mischaracterized as renewable and nonpolluting. Upon
closer  examination  of  those  green  options,  many  will  appear  decidedly
“browner”  than  advertised,  and  they  will  not  present  a  major  supply-side
solution to our energy challenges.5

The 

Biofuels: Field of Dreams

 

Can we grow our way out of an energy deficit? Federal legislation with
such titles as the Renewable Fuels Act (2005) and the Biofuels Security Act
(2006)  are  both  misleading  with  regard  to  ethanol,  the  primary  biofuel.
First, it really isn’t renewable when you consider that nearly as much fossil
fuel–generated  energy  is  required  to  produce  it  as  it  actually  yields.
Alternatively, if all the energy used to plant, fertilize, harvest, and process
the biofuel came from the ethanol produced, it would displace a gasoline
consumption equivalent to only about 3.5 percent. This is about the same
amount  that  the  Natural  Resources  Defense  Council  (NRDC)  estimates
might be saved by inflating tires properly.6

Regarding  energy  security,  biofuels  suffer  from  some  very  serious
reliability  and  capacity  limitations.  Corn  crops,  the  plant  stock  for  US
ethanol, are vulnerable to periodic drought conditions. On average, a crop

yield  decline  of  nearly  one-third  occurs  about  1  year  out  of  20  due  to
insufficient  rainfall.  And  even  during  good  years,  the  total  offset  on
gasoline  consumption  will  be  very  small,  regardless  of  any  mandates
established by federal and state governments.

Ethanol  refiners  (actually  wood  alcohol  “distillers”)  cite  energy
independence  as  a  compelling  argument  for  the  massive  subsidies  they
receive. Imported oil continues to provide about 60 percent of all petroleum
fuel  we  use,  and  exposes  the  United  States  to  large  economic  risks  and
massive trade imbalances that ethanol will not alleviate.7

But if we were to produce enough ethanol to replace gasoline altogether,
it would require that about 71 percent of all US farmland be dedicated for
energy crops.8 By way of illustration, let’s just think about distilling all of
our present US corn production into that 180-proof grain alcohol—ethanol.
That  would  only  displace,  at  most,  about  14  percent  of  the  gasoline  we
currently  guzzle.  In  2007,  ethanol  consumed  approximately  one-fourth  of
all US corn production. In 2008, that amount grew to about one-third, and
the percent will continue to rise. The 2007 amount was estimated to have
offset  US  gasoline  consumption  by  3.5  percent  while  corn  costs  had
doubled over a 2-year period.9

Assuming that it is possible for the United States to produce a mandated
36 billion gallons of ethanol by 2022, it won’t really make a big difference.
That  would  replace  only  about  1.5  billion  barrels  per  day  (bbl/d)  of  oil,
amounting to only about 7 percent of our needs; that is, providing we hold
consumption to current levels.10

Because  US  farmland  is  scarce  and  expensive,  each  additional  acre  of
corn  used  to  produce  ethanol  is  one  less  that  is  available  for  other  crops
such as soybeans and wheat, which have seen price increases of more than
240 percent since 2006. This, in turn, produces a ripple effect that raises the
costs  of  meat,  milk,  eggs,  and  other  foods  with  international  export
consequences. Since US farmers provide about 70 percent of all global corn
exports, even small diversions for ethanol production have produced high
inflation levels in America and food riots abroad.11

Two professors at the University of Minnesota’s Center for International
Food  and  Agricultural  Policy,  C.  Ford  Runge  and  Benjamin  Senauer,
estimate that filling a 25-gallon tank of an SUV with pure ethanol requires
more than 450 pounds of corn. That would be enough calories to feed one
person for a year.12

Ethanol also competes with people and livestock for water—lots and lots
of  water.  It  requires  about  4  gallons  of  water  to  produce  1  gallon  of  the
alcohol  fuel,  in  addition  to  other  water  that  production  plants  typically
recycle. Many Corn Belt regions where the production facilities are sited,
particularly  in  the  Midwest  and  the  Great  Plains,  are  beginning  to
experience  significant  water  supply  problems.  Beef  and  dairy  cattle  feed
lots located near the plants to take advantage of the co-product distillers’
grain  for  livestock  feed,  add  to  local  water  demands,  as  do  agricultural
irrigation and urban expansion.

About one-half of all ethanol plants use municipal water for some or all
production, and the rest sink their own wells. In many areas, the aquifers
that  supply  the  water  are  being  depleted  faster  than  they  can  recharge,  a
situation that is occurring in the Chicago-Milwaukee region, for example.
By  definition,  this  is  an  unsustainable  condition  that  may,  quite  possibly,
prove  to  be  the  Achilles  heel  of  future  corn-based  ethanol  programs
nationwide.13 Applying Minnesota’s water consumption averages to national
ethanol  production  estimates,  water  consumption  will  have  increased  254
percent  by  volume  between  1998  and  2008.  Lack  of  adequate  water  is
already curtailing some requests for new ethanol plant permits. An example
is  a  planned  Lincoln-Pipestone  Rural  Water  System  application  that
couldn’t meet a 350-milliongallons-per-year water requirement needed for a
proposed 100-million-gallons-peryear ethanol plant.14

Ethanol production is also being linked to water pollution. US farmers,
who planted more corn in 2007 than at any time since World War II, are
tilling more and more land that is not well suited for intensive agriculture,
exacerbating erosion and pesticide runoff that are infiltrating groundwater
and  aquifers.  Rather  than  rotating  corn  planting  with  soybeans  to  replace
soil  nitrogen,  many  farmers  are  planting  corn  year  after  year  and  adding
large  amounts  of  nitrogen  fertilizer.  On  average,  about  30  pounds/acre  of
each 140 pounds/acre of nitrogen fertilizer leaches away and runs off into
creeks, lakes, and aquifers. Some winds up in drinking water, posing special
health  problems  for  children  and  pregnant  women.  More  runoff  occurs
when  corn  isn’t  rotated  with  other  crops  because  the  soil  develops  more
clumps,  which  results  in  the  need  for  more  tilling  and  hence  becomes
looser, which can result in more erosion.15

Then  there  is  the  issue  of  emissions.  Even  though  ethanol  fuel  may
  than  does  gasoline,  it  nevertheless  releases

produce  marginally  less  CO

2

large  quantities  of  nitrogen  oxide  (smog)  that  causes  respiratory  disease.
This can add to an already large problem in many urban areas, such as Los
Angeles and throughout the Northeast.16 Thus, living near ethanol plants can
be  unpleasant.  More  than  two  hundred  such  plants,  located  in  a  swath
extending from Nebraska and Kansas east into Ohio, emit thousands of tons
of CO
 and various pollutants. As Frank O’Donnell, president of Clean Air
Watch, observed, “I think word is getting out that ethanol refineries can be a
heck  of  a  problem  if  you  live  near  them.  You’re  taking  areas  that  are
generally not seeing a lot of pollution now and darkening the skies.”17

2

2

What  about  ethanol’s  prospective  benefits  to  reduce  global  warming?
After all, Al Gore often mentions with pride how, as vice president, he cast
a tie-breaking Senate vote August 4, 1994, that mandated use of ethanol. It
guaranteed  ethanol  and  other  renewable  fuels  a  15  percent  share  of  the
lucrative fuel oxygenate market in 1995, with that amount increasing to 30
percent in following years.18 Mr. Gore also joined the venture capital group
Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers (in November 2007), whose key partner,
venture capitalist John Doerr, is pushing for expanded biofuel use. Yet there
is growing evidence that biofuels may actually release more CO
 emissions
than conventional petroleum-based gasoline does. As reported in the journal
Science, “Corn-based ethanol … instead of producing a 20 percent savings,
nearly  doubles  greenhouse  emissions  over  30  years  .  .  .  Biofuels  from
switchgrass, if grown on US corn lands, increase emissions by 50 percent.”
This  is  because  biofuel  markets  encourage  farmers  to  level  forests  and
convert  wilderness  areas  into  farmland,  which  would  otherwise  serve  as
CO

 sinks.19
Still  another  problem  with  ethanol  is  that  it  isn’t  very  efficient  as  an
energy source as compared with petroleum. For one thing, since its energy
density is about one-third less than that of gasoline, more must be burned to
produce  the  same  amount  of  power.  It  is  also  more  energy  intensive  to
produce. On average, an oil company burns energy equivalent to about 1
gallon of oil to process 20 gallons of gasoline, while ethanol yields versus
energy  requirements  are  only  slightly  positive  at  best.  It  takes  burning
almost a gallon of ethanol to produce 1 gallon of ethanol (subject to debate
even  on  that  small  gain).  Sugarcane  ethanol  processing  in  Brazil  is  only
about one-third as energy intensive as corn ethanol processing, but the fuel
is virtually barred from US import by a $0.54/gallon tariff applied to protect
American markets. Since large amounts of fossils are consumed to irrigate,

2

Ethanol  transportation  imposes  additional  energy  costs.  Unlike  oil  and
natural gas, it can’t be moved through existing pipelines because it readily
absorbs  water  and  various  impurities.  Instead,  it  must  be  transported  by
truck  or  rail,  either  of  which  is  much  more  expensive.  Ethanol  produced
from plant cellulose rather than corn is advertised as a promising alternative
to avoid competition with food crops, but it has yet to be demonstrated as a
viable  commercial  option.  It  would  also  impose  even  vastly  larger
transportation requirements in addition to the processing complexities and
difficulties.  Replacing  50  percent  of  current  gasoline  consumption  using
cellulosic ethanol would require about 13 percent of all US land, along with
enormous environmental and economic costs.20

And what about the costs to the consumer? Who comes out ahead on the
deal? You may have guessed by now that we’re being hosed at the pump
along with the fuel.

fertilize,  harvest,  and  process  corn  ethanol,  it  serves  as  little  more  than  a
way to recycle oil and natural gas into a different fuel form, offering no real
advantages and some major liabilities.

During  2006,  US  taxpayers  provided  subsidies,  courtesy  of  our
government, that totaled about $7 billion for 4.9 billion gallons of ethanol
($1.45/gallon of ethanol and $2.21/gallon of gasoline replaced).21 Because
producing that gallon of ethanol cost $0.38 more than making gasoline with
the  same  quantity  of  energy,  that  amounted  to  $1.12  extra  profit.  Of  the
total, $2.5 billion came from subsidies of $0.51/gallon paid out of taxes as a
blender’s  credit,  and  $0.9  billion  was  paid  out  of  tax  money  for  corn
subsidies.  In  addition,  consumers  paid  $3.6  billion  extra  at  the  pump.
Compared  with  subsidies  paid  to  the  oil  industry  based  upon  amount  of
energy produced, ethanol subsidies are more than fifty times higher.22

The  conglomerate  Archer  Daniels  Midland  Company  (ADM)  has  done
well since it first began pushing ethanol in the 1970s. A decade later, ADM
was  producing  175  million  gallons/year;  the  business  has  now  grown  to
produce  more  than  1  billion  gallons/year,  supported  by  more  than  two
hundred different tax breaks and subsidies worth at least $5.5 billion/year.23
Since 2000, ADM has contributed about $3.7 million to state and federal
politicians. For more than a decade, nearly half (or more) of the company’s
profits have come from products the US government has either subsidized
or protected.24

So  just  how  green  is  ethanol?  Its  production  requires  tremendous
amounts  of  fossils,  water,  and  agricultural  land  that  would  be  more
productive if used to grow food crops. At best, ethanol could replace but a
small  percentage  of  fossil-fuel  demands,  and  then  it  could  only  be  cost
competitive through high tax–supported subsidies.

Power Lunches: They’re Not Free After All

 

So,  maybe  ethanol  alcohol  isn’t  the  big  energy  solution  that  many
thought  it  was  brewed  up  to  be.  What  about  all  that  free  wind  and  Sun
power  that’s  unlimited  and  clean?  Also,  there’s  power  from  water  flow,
from Earth’s heat, and from simple hydrogen molecules—all very natural
sources. Why aren’t we taking fuller advantage of them? Has anyone really
thought about that? The answer is yes.

WIND ENERGY: A NATURAL LONG-TERM INVESTMENT
Wind  power—in  contrast  to  ethanol,  for  example—actually  provides
some net energy advantages, although not nearly as much or as cheaply as
we might imagine. Still, given the facts that energy costs will continue to
rise as fossil-fuel resources become scarcer, we will need every source that
can  offer  real  contributions.  It  is  vital  to  begin  expanding  infrastructures
now for future needs, and to begin to amortize investment costs on a long-
term basis. Currently, virtually all these up-front costs are being borne by
taxpayers,  through  subsidies  and  other  development  incentives,  and  by
consumers, through higher electricity bills. Yet there is a precedent for this.
Large hydropower programs were built on public funding too.

Advocates of green energy have grossly exaggerated the capacity of wind
power to make a major impact on US electrical needs. Greenpeace is off the
charts  in  this  regard,  claiming  that  “wind  could  supply  more  than  three
times  the  total  amount  of  electricity  produced  in  the  United  States.”  Any
euphoric  fantasy  that  an  unlimited,  free,  and  clean  alternative  to  carbon-
cursed fossil-fuel sources is blowing by and we’re giving it scant notice is
exceedingly naive and misguided.25

A major point of public confusion regarding wind power potential lies in
a  failure  to  differentiate  maximum  total  capacities,  typically  presented  as
megawatts  (MW),  with  actual  predicted  kilowatt-hours  (kWh)  that  are

determined by annual average wind conditions at a particular site. Wind is
intermittent  and  velocities  constantly  change.  Unfortunately,  wind  isn’t
always  available,  especially  when  it  is  needed  most—such  as  during  hot
summer  days  when  demands  for  air-conditioning  are  highest.  For  this
reason, a backup power system (usually a gas turbine system) or electrical
supplies  from  other  power  grid  sources  must  carry  the  load.  Even  when
wind  is  available,  the  highly  fluctuating  intensity  requires  that  the  power
grid balance the supply on a second-by-second basis, adding complexities
and  costs  to  the  total  network.  The  backup  supplies,  called  “spinning
reserves,” add significant operational costs that are passed on to customers.26
Output  volatility  due  to  wind’s  intermittent  nature  varies  greatly
according to location and time of year. In 2006, wind farms in California, a
major wind state, produced power at only about 10 percent of their rated
capacity. Texas, one of the most promising wind energy states, produced at
about 17 percent capacity. In early 2007, the Electric Reliability Council of
Texas, an independent state operator, determined that only about 8.7 percent
of  installed  wind  capability  could  be  counted  on  as  dependable  capacity
during peak demand periods.27

The  dependable  capacity  of  any  electrical  system  is  referred  to  as  the
“base load” capacity: the minimum amount of proven, consistent, around-
the-clock,  rain-orshine  power  that  utilities  must  supply  to  meet  customer
demands. Here, wind and sunshine have big disadvantages.

Taking  these  volatility  reductions  into  account,  consider  a  May  2007
prediction made by the American Council on Renewable Energy that it is
“technically feasible to increase wind capacity to supply 20 percent of this
nation’s  electricity  by  2030,”  providing  340  gigawatts  (GW),  or  340,000
MW, by that time. What exactly does that mean in terms of real, available
kWh-generating  output?  Actually,  it  means  very  little  if  merely  a  minor
percentage  of  that  technical  feasibility  actually  provides  electricity  when
needed.28

By  the  end  of  2006,  wind  energy  provided  about  0.5  percent  of  US
electricity, with 11.6 GW of installed capacity. The industry has set a new
target of producing 100 GW by 2020, which is suggested to compare with
the capacity of about a hundred nuclear plants. A reality check indicates a
different picture. Unlike for nuclear plants, which produce reliable power
levels continuously, it is necessary to factor in a big discounted equivalency
factor  for  wind.  To  be  extremely  generous,  let’s  assume  that  the  actual

average  output  would  be  30  percent  of  total  installed  capacity.  In  that
optimistic case, the real output would be equivalent to less than 5 percent of
the country’s electricity, and more realistically, about half that amount.29

A  major  limitation  of  individual  wind  farms  is  that  they  simply  don’t
produce power on the massive scales needed in large cities and industrial
areas  where  space  is  at  a  premium  and  land  is  prohibitively  expensive.
Another limitation is that places where wind conditions are most ideal are
often  remote  from  areas  where  demands  are  highest,  requiring  large
investments for power transmission lines and land right-of-way use.30

2

Sites  with  suitable  wind  conditions  for  power  production  are
geographically limited. From an energy-generation point of view, the best
ones are typically along mountain ridges and coastal areas. Unfortunately,
these  same  types  of  locations  are  also  prized  for  scenic  views  and  are
overflown by bird and bat species that become turbine blade casualties. And
even though national environmental organizations such as Greenpeace and
the  Sierra  Club  have  become  wind  power  advocates  in  their  war  against
fossils,  others  who  live  in  proposed  wind  farm  locations  have  launched
strong opposition to turbines. Those areas include the Green Mountains of
Vermont, the Adirondacks in northern New York, the Chesapeake Bay off
the  Atlantic  coast  between  Maryland  and  Virginia,  Cape  Cod 
in
Massachusetts, and the ridges of northern Appalachia. Local residents have
filed  successful  protests.  They  don’t  want  their  own  backyards  cluttered
with towering turbines that would interfere with the spirit-soothing views
they paid a lot of money to enjoy.

Yet  what  true  “environmentalist”  could  possibly  object  to  nonpolluting
wind power that will help save our planet from the dreaded CO
 scourge?
Well,  for  one,  there  was  Robert  F.  Kennedy  Jr.,  nephew  of  a  popular
president  and  prominent  lawyer  for  the  NRDC,  who  fought  against  a
proposed  130-turbine  offshore  development  called  “Cape  Wind”  in
Nantucket  Sound.  Another  uncle,  the  late  Senator  Ted  Kennedy  (D-MA),
along with Senate colleague and fellow Massachusetts resident John Kerry,
didn’t want Cape Wind disturbing his vistas either. Senator Kerry explained
his  reasons  this  way:  “I’ve  always  said  that  I  think  Senator  Kennedy  has
raised  very  legitimate  issues  with  respect  to  the  siting  process  and  with
respect to location. I’ve also suggested that it’s my opinion there may be
even  better  locations  for  it.  I’ve  sat  with  Jim  Gordon  [president  of  Cape
Wind],  I’ve  sat  with  other  folks,  I’ve  met  with  Coast  Guard  people,  I’ve

tried to do due diligence on it, and I’m not sure there aren’t both windier
and, you know, more accessible areas.”31

Yes, areas not off his front beach. And there are others besides members
of the New England elite class who don’t want to live near wind turbines
either. Take Texans, for example.

In  early  2007,  owners  of  the  famous  King  Ranch,  one  of  the  world’s
largest, lobbied the Texas Legislature to pass a law to regulate wind turbine
development.32 They were seeking a bill requiring companies to obtain state
permits  based  upon  studies  to  determine  whether  the  noise  from  turbines
“interferes  with  the  property  rights  of  nearby  landowners.”  This  was
prompted after the King Ranch president, Jack Hunt, heard that managers of
a neighboring Kenedy Ranch were going to allow 240 wind turbines to be
installed on that property. He charged that the smaller ranch (only 400,000
acres) was “sacrificing the long-term value of a rare resource for short-term
revenue,” and that the turbine siting was “a horrific location.” Some folks,
even those with lots of surrounding space, just don’t want to live near wind
farms. Period!

Mortality  impacts  upon  migratory  bird  populations  and  endangered  bat
species  continue  to  rally  anti–wind  farm  activists  who  have  blocked
developments with lawsuits. Studies have shown that as many as forty-four
thousand  birds,  including  golden  and  bald  eagles,  have  been  killed  by
turbines in the Altamont Pass east of San Francisco over 2 decades.33 One
reason appears to be that prey animals tend to take shelter at the turbines
and multiply, serving as attractive bait for raptors.

In May 2006, Superior Renewable Energy received approval to build the
nation’s largest offshore wind farm, with five hundred 400-foot-tall turbines
off the coast of Padre Island, Texas. That site is right in the middle of the
path that an estimated two-thirds of all birds in eastern and central North
America follow as they migrate. One plan that has been considered to help
protect  birds  that  are  forced  to  fly  low  during  bad  weather  is  to  use
technology that turns off the blades at those times. It’s not easy to prevent
all environmental risks.

And what about wind farm influences upon whales? Yes, you read this
right!  On  June  25,  2010,  environmental  groups  filed  a  legal  challenge  to
block the planned Massachusetts offshore Nantucket Sound project because
it  will  endanger  migratory  birds  and  whales.  Are 
they  possibly
underestimating whale intelligence?

There  are  also  costs  and  risks  for  those  who  ultimately  pay  for  wind
energy  projects,  namely,  taxpayers  and  customers.  Without  large  public
subsidies and other incentives, the industry would not be solvent. More than
half  of  all  potential  return  on  investment  for  companies  that  install  and
operate  the  systems  comes  from  federal,  state,  and  local  tax  benefits.
During 2006, federal tax incentives alone were about $2.75 billion.

Special public incentives for wind energy development come in a variety
of  forms.  A  primary  break  involves  tax  avoidance  mechanisms  afforded
through  production  tax  credits  (PTCs),  accelerated  depreciation,  and
reduced or forgiven property and sales taxes.

The  federal  PTC  program,  which  began  in  1992  with  a  1.5¢  per  kWh
subsidy for wind power owners, increases at the rate of inflation (now about
3¢  per  kWh).  These  credits  are  directly  deductible  from  federal  income
taxes  and  are  particularly  valuable  to  large  companies  that  have  lots  of
profits  in  other  areas.  The  PTC  program  is  also  attractive  for  small  wind
farm developers as a way to sell their projects to larger companies for the
tax benefits they provide.34

Federal accelerated depreciation offers a subsidy that enables wind farm
investors  to  take  a  generous  double-declining  5-year  depreciation  tax
shelter. The investors can deduct 40 percent of capital investments the first
year, and 24 percent the second, and can continue until all deductions are
complete before the end of the fifth year. This is a tremendous advantage
that  allows  generators  of  this  energy  to  give  money back to shareholders
rapidly; conventional electricity plant developers, by comparison, must use
20-year depreciations. Some states that “conform” their corporate income
tax programs to the federal system allow otherwise taxable income to carry
through to the wind farm developers’ state income tax returns as well.

Some  federal  and  state  programs  afford  green  energy  providers
guaranteed  markets  at  premium  sales  prices.  States  that  have  legislated
mandatory RPSs require electric utility companies to purchase designated
amounts  of  energy  from  wind,  solar,  and  biofuel  providers,  typically  at
higher-than-conventional costs that are passed on to their customers. Some
states  require  or  encourage  electric  utilities  to  offer  “green  program”
advertising  (“greenwashing”)  to  ask  customers  to  voluntarily  sign  up  for
higher-priced,  more  “environmentally  responsible”  electricity.  Since
subscription levels tend to be low, the extra costs are distributed among all
customers  and  hidden  in  invoices.  There  is  strong  lobbying  by  the

renewable  energy  industry  to  have  RPSs  legislated  by  the  federal
government.35

Federal and state government agencies are mandating that purchases of
the  electricity  they  use  come  from  renewable  sources  at  related  premium
prices. Several state and local governments enable wind energy developers
to  reduce  or  eliminate  property  taxes.  Some  states  authorize  utilities  to
charge  special  public  benefit  taxes  to  customers  who  pay  money  to  wind
farm operators. And some states provide industrial development bonds that
enable  wind  farms  to  be  financed  by  state-backed  loans  that  have  lower-
than-commercial interest rates.

Although wind may never be a big power player in the United States, and
certainly is less of a force than represented by enthusiasts, one fact is clear:
So  long  as  fossil-fuel  costs  are  manipulated  by  government,  emission
regulations  continue  to  rise,  energy  demands  increase,  and  generous
subsidies flow, wind industry forecasts will be at least gusty.

Much to the chagrin of DOE officials and other advocates, a report from
Spain discredited the idea that wind power is a job creator, an idea touted by
the Obama-Biden administration. US officials banded with trade lobbyists
to minimize the exposed facts. The study, released by researchers at King
Juan  Carlos  University,  concluded  that  every  “green  job”  created  by  the
wind industry killed off 2.2 jobs elsewhere in the Spanish economy.36

Research director Gabriel Calzada Alvarez didn’t fundamentally object to
wind  power.  He  did,  however,  find  that  when  a  government  artificially
props up the industry with subsidies, higher electrical costs (31 percent) and
tax hikes (5 percent), along with government debt, follow. Every green job
created was estimated to cost $800,000 per year to create, and 90 percent of
those green jobs were temporary.

Alvarez specifically presented lessons for the United States. He warned
of  potential  “self-inflicted  economic  wounds”  and  forecasted  that  this
country could lose 6.6 million jobs if it followed Spain’s example.

A  few  months  after  the  study  was  released,  researchers  at  the  Danish
Center for Politiske Studier reached similar conclusions about underwriting
wind power based on their country’s experience: “It is fair to assess that no
wind energy would exist if it had to compete on market terms.”37

Both  of  the  reports  have  been  pointedly  ignored  by  the  Obama-Biden
administration,  which  has  declared  an  agenda—with  $2.3  billion  to  be
allocated in tax credits— to create seventeen thousand “high-quality green

jobs.” President Obama has said, “Building a robust clean energy sector is
how we will create the jobs of the future.”38

Then,  in  response  to  a  release  of  the  reports  and  a  critical  Washington
Post column by George Will, bureaucrats at the Energy Department, left-
wing activists, and trade lobbyists went into defensive mode. E-mail files,
obtained  by  Christopher  Horner  at  the  Competitive  Enterprise  Institute,
reveal  concerted  damage  control  efforts.  Their  strategy  was  to  hide  facts,
discredit foreign academic sources, and concoct their own white paper as a
rebuttal.

One  such  e-mail,  sent  by  Elizabeth  Salerno  of  the  American  Wind
Energy  Association  (AWEA)  to  Suzanne  Tegan  of  the  DOE’s  National
Renewable Energy Laboratory, illustrates how the industry lobby and a US
taxpayer-funded  government  entity  can  collaborate.  It  states,  “It’s  critical
we respond (to the Spanish report). This thing won’t die and it’s doing a
good job of undermining our green job message. If we put together a call
with  CAP  [the  Center  for  American  Progress],  can  UCS  [Union  of
Concerned Scientists] participate on a comprehensive response?”39

Tegan  then  called  for  a  telephone  meeting  the  next  day  to  draft  a
response. In an e-mail follow-up, she wrote: “We are working with AWEA
(who is working with UCS and others) to put out a response to this report,
which  is  methodologically  unsound  and  states  that  the  renewable  energy
policy  in  Spain  (and  therefore  the  US)  is  a  waste  of  money  and  actually
costs jobs rather than creates jobs. The report actually addresses the Obama
administration’s  ideas  and  policies.”  Tegan  urged  nine  people  on  her
recipient list to look over the report and provide comments she could pass
up her chain of command. She referred to lobbyists at AWAE and CAP as
“colleagues.”

CAP is a far-left organization funded by George Soros and led by John
Podesta.  According  to  logs,  Podesta  visited  the  White  House  thirty-one
times over 2 months in the fall of 2009, the only period for which records
are available. In an e-mail to the Investor’s Business Daily, which provided
this information, Horner commented:

The  least  revelatory  aspect  of  this  was  the  hollowness  of  the
Obama  administration’s  claims  to  have  driven  lobbyists  from  the
executive  branch.  Providing  an  inside  role  for  politically  favored
industries  in  developing  official  administration  statements  falls  even

further  from  the  rhetoric.  Worse,  with  direct  communications  with
ideological  activists  like  CAP  and  UCS  undoubtedly  the  anticipated
and regular subject of FOIA [Freedom of Information Act] requests,
we  also  see  how  the  Obama  administration  employed  an  industry
lobby to channel the influence of such groups into the administration’s
inner workings to circumvent the expected pathway for security.40

Horner also noted that DOE officials have since misled Congress on such

matters.

The wind industry spent $5 million on lobbying in 2009, up from $1.7
million  the  previous  year.  It  currently  is  reported  to  have  thirty-six
lobbyists, up from two in 2004.

Does the industry create jobs? In all fairness, yes. For example, a new
wind farm in West Texas created twenty-eight hundred jobs. Unfortunately,
twenty-four  hundred  of  those  were  in  China,  with  just  four  hundred
temporary positions in the United States.41

SOLAR POWER: REMOTE POSSIBILITIES
Like wind, solar power is a natural, free source of energy—provided, of
course, that public subsidies and customers of high-price electricity cover
the  large  costs.  Solar  power  is  also  very  versatile.  It  can  provide  thermal
energy  to  heat  water  and  electricity  to  power  spacecraft  above  Earth’s
atmosphere as well as small handheld devices. It can also produce utility-
grade electricity for those who live in a desert and have a habit of going to
bed very early without their television on. But don’t count on solar power to
deliver  us  any  distance  along  the  road  to  energy  independence.  Not  even
during the industry’s sunniest seasons.

This is likely to come as a very unwelcome observation to many people.
When the trade association for the nuclear power industry asked a thousand
Americans in 2007 about what energy source they thought would be used
most in 15 years, the winner was the Sun, the choice selected by 27 percent
of those polled.42 Yet it will be truly remarkable if solar power accounts for
more than even 1 percent in the coming decades. It currently provides only
about  6  percent  of  the  US  electricity  that  is  derived  just  from  renewable
sources.

Thanks almost entirely to a variety of federal and state subsidies the solar
industry is witnessing growth, up about 43 percent during 2007. This added
110  MW  of  new  capacity,  but  onto  a  very  small  previous  base.  At  least
eight large-scale solar power projects are reported to be under development,
comparable to adding six 500 MW coal-fired plants.43

The solar power industry really has two very different types of segments:
One markets photovoltaic panel units to private and commercial customers,
and  another  provides  utility-scale  electricity  from  central  power  stations.
Each segment is realizing progressive technology developments that lower
costs and improve efficiencies.

Panel-type units (typically bolted to roofs) that convert sunlight directly
into electricity continue to be very expensive relative to power benefits. A
small,  4  kW  home  installation  costs  about  $34,000  before  government
rebates and tax breaks. Solar energy conversion efficiencies range from an
average of about 16 percent to as high as 22 percent in direct sunlight. But,
like wind, power is intermittent; often, it isn’t available when you need it or
in  the  amounts  required.  A  lot  depends  upon  both  location  and  the
orientation  of  the  roof  or  other  structure  the  system  is  mounted  to.  An
advantage of solar over wind is that peak power occurs at midday, which is,
correspondingly, a peak demand period.

Nationwide  solar  power  expansion  is  severely  constrained  by  both
geography and the power source’s fundamentally intermittent nature. High
capital cost is also a factor, but let’s assume that increasing fossil-fuel prices
and  technological  advancements  cure  those  problems  over  time—as  well
they might—and that regions are favored with clear skies over much of the
year and that rain, dust, and snow accumulations don’t interfere. And even
under the best conditions, there is a recurring cyclical problem. It is called
“night.”

World  markets  for  silicon,  a  key  ingredient  of  solar  cells,  have
contributed  to  the  high  costs  of  photovoltaic  panel  systems.  Some  newer
technology  markets  are  replacing  the  panels  with  thin-film  photovoltaic
sheets  that  are  less  expensive,  but  presently,  these  are  only  about  half  as
efficient.44 Accordingly, they require more space and are mostly geared for
large  commercial  business  applications.  Traditional  photovoltaic  cell
systems now constitute about 90 percent of the market.

Utility-scale concentrating solar power (CSP) systems, which use lenses
or  mirrors  that  track  the  Sun  to  focus  radiation  on  thermal  collectors  or

photovoltaic cells to produce electricity, are another alternative. They can
range in size from as small as 10 kW to more than 100 MW. Because they
require  direct  sunlight  (not  diffuse  light),  their  use  is  limited  to  Sun  Belt
locations. CSP systems that use lenses to concentrate light onto photocells
are  much  more  efficient  and  require  less  surface  area  than  standard
photovoltaic  panel  approaches  do.  Solar  thermal  CSP  systems  reflect
sunlight  energy  onto  receiver  units  that  contain  a  heat  transfer  fluid  or
molten nitrate salt to drive power turbine generators. Overall, solar-electric
conversion  efficiencies  are  relatively  low,  ranging  from  about  13  to  25
percent.

Energy  storage  continues  to  be  a  big  problem  for  CSP,  just  as  it  is  for
wind. Installations can operate only as part of a larger system network that
provides backups such as fossil-fuel generation or connections to a nuclear-
powered  grid.  New  plants  in  sparsely  populated  desert  locations  also
impose power transmission infrastructure development costs, oftentimes as
much as $1.5 million per mile.

As  with  all  energy  options,  some  environmentalists  don’t  like  CSP
stations either. One complaint is that they take up too much desert land, thus
displacing certain animal and reptile species. A mirrored CSP installation
may require between 5 and 15 acres per MW, compared, for example, with
an equivalent gas-fired generation requirement that can be as little as 1/25
of an acre.45

During 1993 congressional hearings, the Sierra Club and the Wilderness
Society  testified  in  favor  of  preserving  areas  within  California’s  Mojave
Desert  from  commercial  development,  including  solar  and  recreational
uses. The president of the Wilderness Society explained why:

The California desert contains some of the most wild and beautiful
landscapes in America, but these lands are being continually degraded.
The fragile desert soils, scarce water, unique ecosystems, irreplaceable
archaeological  sites,  and  spectacular  scenic  beauty  are  receiving  too
little protection in the face of a variety of development pressures. The
opportunity to experience what remains of the frontier quality of the
region is rapidly disappearing as development spreads. The public has
lost much of this priceless heritage already; it is time to save the best
of what remains as a lasting gift to future generations.46

And  then  there’s  the  problem  with  pollution  from  photovoltaic  solar
panels. Can this be true? Haven’t we been told that solar power is clean?
Sure,  but  making  those  collectors  isn’t,  because  they  are  manufactured
using highly toxic heavy metals, gases, and solvents. Some of the materials
are carcinogenic. Some of the gases are lethal, and some are explosive. Not
all  factories  that  produce  photovoltaic  panels  incorporate  scrubbers  to
protect  against  accidental  releases,  but  workers  in  those  plants  must  be
strictly  protected.  Fires  in  such  facilities  can  be  particularly  hazardous.
After solar panels are decommissioned following about 20 to 30 years of
useful  life,  they  are  supposed  to  be  disposed  of  in  special  toxic  dumps
rather  than  sent  to  waste  incinerators  where  the  heavy  metals  (such  as
cadmium  and  lead-based  solder)  can  vaporize  into  the  atmosphere.  Or,  if
dumped into landfills, the arsenic and lead can leach into the soils and water
tables.48

New designs are lower in toxicity and are required to pass DOE tests to
reduce these hazards. Still, large photovoltaic farms capable of producing
1,000 MW per year would cover 50 square miles or more of land, and their
production  would  yield  substantial  quantities  of  toxic  waste  that  present
costly and difficult disposal challenges.

Based  on  that  argument,  another  environmentalist  even  argued  that  a
nuclear  option  might  be  preferable:  “From  the  standpoint  of  scenic
pollution and destruction of wilderness, there are distinct advantages to the
hard  energy  option  .  .  .  A  nuclear  plant  modifies  a  relatively  small  area
compared to a large-scale solar installation.”47

Solar  power  continues  to  require  subsidies  to  be  competitive  even  in
desert locations where clear skies prevail. The United States Air Force is
taking advantage of these incentives to support development of the largest
North American solar plant to provide electricity for the Nellis Air Force
Base located outside Las Vegas. The power facility covers 140 acres of the
Nevada desert with a massive photovoltaic array of silicon cells that rotate
to  track  the  Sun.  The  facility  is  capable  of  producing  15  MW  of  power,
enough to provide about 30 percent of Nellis’s requirements, where 12,000
people  work  and  7,215  residents  live.  The  Air  Force  expects  to  save  $1
million per year in power costs, thanks to multimillion-dollar federal and
state financial subsidies and incentives. “Without those, prices wouldn’t be
competitive,”  according  to  Daniel  Tomlinson,  editor  of  a  solar  newsletter
for Navigant Consulting. David Edwards, a market analyst of green power

with ThinkEquity Partners of San Francisco, agrees: “The price of solar is
coming down, but today those subsidies are important.”49

The  Nellis  project  was  developed  through  a  complex  arrangement
between the Air Force and three financial partners. The Air Force will not
pay  any  of  the  construction  costs,  but  essentially  guarantees  the  market.
Private  investors  will  pay  more  than  $100  million  in  capital  costs  and
receive  substantial  federal  tax  subsidies.  For  example,  MMA  Renewable
Ventures and its investors enjoy a 30 percent tax credit, have the benefit of
accelerated  capital  depreciation  schedules,  and  sell  solar  energy  credits
generated by the project to NV Energy, which must obtain 20 percent of its
power from renewable sources by 2015.

So  there  you  have  it.  Our  country’s  Air  Force  (that  is,  the  US
government)  is  saving  about  $1  million  a  year  because  that  same  US
government is providing many tens of millions of dollars in tax incentives,
in combination with generous contributions in the form of higher electricity
prices  charged  to  Nevada  customers.  Just  think  of  all  that  money  the
government is saving us! Caution: Don’t attempt this stunt at home.

HYDROPOWER: FEW DAM PROSPECTS
Hydropower is an important and sustainable source of energy that many
environmentalists  don’t  want  to  claim  as  an  alternative.  Although  it
produces  nearly  half  of  all  US  renewable  electricity—about  equal  to
biomass—its impact upon fish and aquatic ecosystems earns it enmity.

Expansion of hydroelectric capacity is not a major option in this country
because most primary sites are already being exploited or are off-limits for
environmental  reasons.  Dams  currently  provide  about  two-thirds  of  all
electricity  in  the  Pacific  Northwest  region  and  are  dominant  sources  in
Idaho and Washington.

Although  hydropower  produces  no  pollutant  emissions  per  se,  dam
construction and operations can have significant ecological repercussions.
As  they  swim  downstream  toward  the  ocean,  many  young  salmon  in  the
Northwest are killed by turbine blades, and adult fish attempting to swim
upstream to reproduce are blocked by dams. After salmon populations were
dramatically reduced in the Northwest Columbia Basin, fish channels and
side channels were built to help alleviate this problem. Also, because water
in the dams tends to be colder and oxygen-poor at the bottom as compared

with  the  surface,  rapid  releases  of  dam  water  can  kill  fish  and  damage
wildlife vegetation food sources downstream.

Pressure from mainstream environmentalists persuaded the Bush-Quayle
administration  to  drop  incentives  to  promote  hydro  development  in  the
Energy Policy Act of 1992, and both the Sierra Club and Trout Unlimited
criticized the Clinton-Gore administration that followed for including it as a
global warming prevention strategy.

Trout Unlimited is also lobbying to remove four major dams that have
been constructed at enormous cost on the Columbia River, due to alarming
trout casualties. Farmers who have come to depend upon the dams for water
irrigation oppose the opposers. Other groups attribute the salmon losses to
overfishing by indigenous Indian residents (the US government purchased a
half  million  dollars’  worth  of  nets  for  their  use)  and  consumption  of
fingerlings by a large colony of terns from a nearby island bird sanctuary
created  by  the  United  States  Army  Corps  of  Engineers.  Trout  Unlimited
also wants to eliminate the bird sanctuary, a proposal that is opposed by the
Audubon Society.

As further evidence of hydropower’s recent politically incorrect status, it
was dropped from renewable category statistical listings in the 1995 edition
of  the  Electric  Power  Annual,  published  by  the  US  Energy  Information
Administration.  Environmental  lobbying  even  prompted  the  US  Export-
Import Bank to deny funding for China’s 18,000 MW Three Gorges Project
when Friends of the Earth and other groups expressed concerns about water
quality, endangered species, and population resettlement impacts.50

Then there’s the possibility of harnessing wave and tidal energy. Those
should be limitless sources, right? After all, oceans are really big, and all
you need to move water around is a Sun-Moon system, and we have one of
those.

But some of the technologies do use turbine blades, presenting potential
dangers  to  fish  and  aquatic  mammals.  Tidal  power  generators,  mostly  in
experimental  and  prototype  testing  stages,  draw  energy  from  underwater
currents.  One  type  uses  the  oscillating  motion  of  water  flowing  past
hydroplane  fins  to  drive  motor  generators,  while  another  operates  with
propeller blades like an underwater wind turbine. Sea-Gen, a system being
tested in Northern Ireland, uses sets of rotor turbines rated at about 1 MW.51
One big limitation of tidal power is that it occurs only twice per day, and
neither of these times coincides with peak power demand periods. Another

constraint  is  that  practical  locations  are  limited  to  places  where  high-
amplitude  tides  exist,  including  river  and  fjord  estuaries  in  the  former
USSR,  Canada,  Korea,  and  the  UK.  Also  problematic  are  relatively  low
output  capacities,  high  maintenance  costs  due  to  corrosion  of  mechanical
parts, and expenses of transmitting power from offshore installations to end
users.

Harnessing power from wave motion may eventually yield more energy
than  from  tides.  New  technologies  are  being  developed  involving
generators  that  can  either  be  coupled  to  floating  devices  or  turned  by  air
displaced by waves. The amount of power produced is determined by wave
height, speed, wavelength, and water density at a given location and time,
and wind conditions are also influential. Northern and southern temperature
zones offer the best wave power locations, with prevailing westerly winds
in winter blowing strongest to produce a “fully developed sea.” Prospective
placements include shoreline, offshore, and deepwater applications. Power
conversion  methods  include  hydraulic  rams,  elastomeric  hose  pumps,
pump-to-shore  systems,  and  hydroelectric  or  air  turbines.  Despite  being
innovative and interesting, potential capacities from tides and waves to be
sufficient  to  seriously  offset  dependencies  upon  other  energy  sources  are
extremely doubtful.

GEOTHERMAL ENERGY: REGIONAL REALITIES
Geothermal  energy  seems  too  good  to  be  true,  and  unfortunately  for
most parts of the United States, it probably is. Think of all that heat, pure
energy,  directly  under  all  of  our  feet—enough  to  provide  countless  times
more  power  than  we  will  ever  need.  But  accessing  it  is  where  the  big
problem arises.

Geothermal  options  fall  into  two  general  categories:  conventional  and
unconventional. The conventional option is hydrothermal, which taps into
hot  water  and  steam  reservoirs  that  exist  only  in  certain  regions  of  the
country.  The  most  economically  feasible  hydrothermal  resources  are
principally  located  west  of  the  Rocky  Mountains,  and  only  California,
Hawaii,  Nevada,  and  Utah  currently  have  operating  power  plants.  The
majority of thermal springs and other surface manifestations of underlying
geothermal  resources  are  also  located  in  the  West,  including  Montana,
North Dakota, and Wyoming.52 Some lower-temperature resources also exist

in central Texas. In total, more than twenty hydrothermal power plants (the
only utility-scale geothermal facilities) produce less than 0.5 percent of all
US electricity.53

More than 90 percent of all installed US geothermal capacity is generated
in  California  and  Nevada,  with  about  half  produced  at  the  Geysers  in
northern  California.  While  that  energy  is  very  clean  with  regard  to
emissions,  it  is  not  technically  renewable  because  the  heat  content  of
reservoirs gradually declines over years of production, often playing out to
unusable temperatures in 50 years or less. Power output at the Geysers, for
example, dropped about 40 percent between 1990 and 2000, due in large
part to reduced reservoir volume.54

As is the case with all energy options, geothermal is not immune from
environmental critics. Because most of the usable reservoirs are located in
remote, scenic wilderness areas, construction of plants, access roads, power
lines, and other infrastructure is perceived as a blighting intrusion on nature.
Geothermal power also consumes large amounts of water, which can impact
aquatic ecosystems and wildlife habitats. Wastewater released from plants
can  potentially  contaminate  surface  and  groundwater  as  well.  For  these
reasons, many prospective sites are restricted from development.55

According to a lawsuit filed against two proposed power plants in the US
District  Court  for  the  Eastern  District  of  California,  the  developments
would  introduce  “highly  toxic  acids”  into  geothermal  wells  in  the  state’s
Medicine Lake Highlands, turning the lands into “an ugly, noisy, stinking
wasteland.” The lawsuit asserted that groundwater pollution would pose a
threat to trout and other wildlife; that the plants would require excavating
750,000-gallon toxic waste sumps; and that trucks and drilling equipment
would  break  the  normal  solitude  of  the  area.  Construction  would  include
unsightly  150-foot-high  drilling  rigs,  nine-story  power  plants  on  15-acre
pads,  seven-story  cooling  towers  capped  by  steam  plumes,  crisscrossing
roads, high-tension transmission lines, and pipelines.56

installations,  should 

Unconventional  geothermal 

into
existence,  aren’t  likely  to  be  popular  with  many  environmental  groups
either.  They  include  (1)  enhanced  geothermal  systems  (EGSs)  that  create
new reservoirs using oil and gas industry technology, and (2) geopressured
and geothermal operations that either drill or take advantage of abandoned
oil  and  gas  “wells  of  opportunity”  to  assess  and  exploit  deep  reservoir
resources.

they  come 

EGSs are proposed to produce energy from geothermal resources that are
otherwise not economical due to lack of water and/or ground permeability.
This  involves  pumping  cold  water  or  water  containing  acids  or  other
chemicals into ground cracks that are too small to allow geothermal fluids
to  flow,  causing  fractures  that  enlarge  them  to  productive  sizes.  An
enthusiastic  report  published  by  MIT  estimates  that  this  approach  could
produce  100  GW  of  US  power  by  2050.  Total  US  electrical  power
consumption is currently about 3,300 GW.57

A study by Jeremy Griggs at Louisiana State University of geopressured
geothermal aquifer potential points out some limitations. A big impediment
is development scale, particularly where commercial aquifers are likely to
be in excess of 10 square miles, causing small-acreage landowners to derail
project  opportunities.  He  concluded  that  medium-term  development
prospects  will  depend  upon  sustainability  of  high  natural  gas  prices;
application  and  acceptance  of  new  technologies;  and  diversification  of
conventional  exploration/production  companies  and  electric  utility
companies to accept the opportunities. The long-term likelihood of large-
scale geopressured aquifer development was predicted to be low.58

HYDROGEN ECONOMY: AN OXYMORON
Imagine the wonderment of a new energy economy based upon vehicles
and  industries  fueled  by  hydrogen  with  no  emissions  other  than  water.
Wouldn’t  that  move  us  away  from  fossil-fuel  dependence  toward  a
blissfully clean environment? Regrettably, only in your dreams! Conserving
energy  through  hydrogen  use  is  the  logical  equivalent  of  converting
processed petroleum back into crude oil in order to stretch oil reserves and
avoid pollutants.

In reality, hydrogen is not characterized by anyone with a background in
physics  or  chemical  engineering  as  an  energy  source  at  all.  Instead,  it  is
defined  as  an  energy  “carrier”—a  way  to  convert  energy  produced  from
another source for storage and use in a different form. This always imposes
energy penalties along with other costs that may sometimes be justified, but
should not be ignored. A free lunch it definitely is not.

Although hydrogen is popularly associated with renewable fuels, most of
the commercial hydrogen in use today is produced as a by-product of fossil-

fuel sources, primarily natural gas. Producing that steam requires energy. It
also consumes natural gas, a nonrenewable fossil-fuel resource.

transfer 

Producing hydrogen through water electrolysis is possible but extremely
energy intensive, with a large net energy loss. If that electricity source is
wind,  the  power  required  must  be  subtracted  from  competing  electricity
uses. If the wind farm is part of a utility grid, then natural gas consumed for
the  spinning  reserve  also  constitutes  a  cost.  If  the  electricity  comes  from
solar  power,  the  penalty  of  water  consumption  in  arid  desert  power  plant
locations becomes a major environmental and practical impediment.59

transportation,  bulk  storage,  and 

In  addition  to  requiring  more  energy  to  create  than  it  yields,  hydrogen
imposes  other  energy  penalties  associated  with  compression,
also 
liquefaction, 
to  end-use
destinations. These problems primarily relate to the fact that hydrogen gas
is the smallest molecule that exists in nature, making it difficult to contain
so that it doesn’t leak out. Unlike natural gas, it can’t be transported through
pipelines.

Hydrogen does not compress easily, requiring energy to increase pressure
sufficiently to compensate for a low energy/volume density. Compressing it
into small containers for transport requires strong and heavy tanks, which
adds  equipment  costs.  Liquid  hydrogen  imposes  even  more  costs  for
liquefaction and tank insulation to prevent the gas from boiling away.

Although hydrogen has a good energy density based upon weight, it has a
poor  energy  density  relative  to  storage  volume.  To  illustrate,  a  gallon  of
liquid  gasoline  weighing  0.9  pounds  actually  contains  about  50  percent
more hydrogen than a gallon of liquid hydrogen weighing 0.6 pounds. This
means that a fuel tank for a hydrogen-fueled car will be much larger and
heavier than a fuel tank for a car that runs on gasoline, unless the driving
range on a tank is reduced substantially.

If  hydrogen  for  automotive  use  is  produced  from  natural  gas,  it  would
make more sense to use the original fuel directly. One reason is for safety.
Hydrogen is highly combustible and will burn in concentrations as low as 4
percent in air. It explodes upon ignition when mixed with air, a fact well
recognized  by  rocket  scientists  and  some  poorly  supervised  high  school
chemistry students.

Hydrogen  does  offer  important  energy  conservation  benefits  in  certain
applications.  A  prime  example  is  for  combined  heat  and  power  fuel  cell
operations that recycle the heat product back into a power system or use it

for  other  purposes,  such  as  air-conditioning.  Hydrogen  technologies  and
applications are most certain to have expanding roles in our energy future
on Earth and in space. But short of some revolutionary and unforeseeable
breakthrough,  they  will  not  present  a  supply-side  solution  to  our  energy
challenges.

Nuclear Power: Elephant in the Closet

 

Nuclear energy must certainly qualify as the world’s least appreciated
and  understood  power  source.  Although  it  provides  some  of  or  all  the
electricity used by more than 1 billion people, and nearly 20 percent of the
US  supply,  it  is  virtually  invisible  even  to  nearby  consumers  who  don’t
realize  it  is  in  their  backyards.  Few  are  aware  that  there  are  104  nuclear
power  plants  distributed  throughout  many  regions  of  this  country,  which
enjoy cleaner air due to their presence.

Nuclear  power  plants  are  environmentally  benign  and  reliable.  They
occupy  very  little  land  area,  produce  only  water  vapor  emissions,  and
require  no  major  transportation  infrastructure.  They  are  extremely  safe,
presenting  no  explosion  or  radiation  contamination  risks,  which  tend  to
worry many people most. And in stark contrast to so-called renewable or
sustainable options, as well as fossil-fuel sources, nuclear power expansion
and longevity capacities are vast.

Nuclear safety and waste hazards primarily arise from regional, national,
and geopolitical issues rather than intrinsically technological problems. In
general, unreasonable and misguided policies are often driven by opposition
to  nuclear  power  based  upon  unwarranted  fear  associated  with  the
Chernobyl  and  Three  Mile  Island  incidents,  which  are  now  readily
preventable.  Licensing  and  construction  of  vital  power  plants  and  waste
storage accommodations are being delayed at a time when other countries
are greatly benefiting from developing these facilities. The United States,
once a leader in nuclear technology development, has fallen behind, both in
science  and 
from
counterproductive  opposition,  a  misinformed  public,  and  bad  policy
decisions,  is  causing  excessive  use  of  precious  fossil-fuel  resources  and
economic burdens that we and future generations can little afford.

infrastructure.  This  circumstance, 

resulting 

in 

The DOE’s EIA estimates that US electricity demands will increase by
about 45 percent by 2030, requiring at least 350,000 MW of new capacity.60
Given that “renewable” sources such as wind, solar, geothermal, and hydro
afford extremely limited expansion potential, the only other non-fossil-fuel
alternative is nuclear. Very fortunately, this option offers large and lasting
growth possibilities. The Nuclear Energy Institute proposes to expand the
nuclear  share  of  US  electricity  production  to  50  percent  by  2050.61  The
World  Nuclear  Association, 
the
International  Atomic  Energy  Agency  believe  that  uranium  resources  are
adequate to meet global power demands for thousands of years.

the  World  Energy  Council,  and 

Uranium is abundant in the United States and in many other parts of the
world, and no other known source can compare in terms of energy density.62
One  ton  of  ore  can  yield  about  4  to  6  pounds  of  yellowcake  uranium,
enough to produce a single pellet of low-enriched uranium oxide weighing
0.24  ounces  (about  7  grams—  slightly  less  than  the  weight  of  three
pennies). That one small pellet contains the same energy as:

•  1,780 pounds of coal
•  149 gallons of oil63
•  157 gallons of regular gasoline64
•  17,000 cubic feet of natural gas

Consider  this  density  in  terms  of  power  plant  land  requirements  for

various options based upon 1,000 MW of installed capacity:

•  According to the AWEA, 1,000 MW of wind farm capacity requires
about  60,000  acres  (94  square  miles);  other  agencies  more  than
double that estimate (intermittent power).65

•    Producing  1,000  MW  from  solar  power  will  require  photovoltaic
arrays  covering  more  than  50  square  miles  (also  intermittent
power).66

•    An  equivalent  1,000  MW  of  energy  from  biofuel  alcohol  could
require about 6,200 square miles of cornfields; about 9,000 square
miles  of  rapeseed  fields  for  bio-oil;  or  burning  of  about  12,000
square miles of wood biomass.

•   A  1,000  MW  nuclear  plant  requires  about  1/3  to  1/2  of  a  square

mile.67

Nuclear  energy  is  finally  gaining  political  traction  from  some  global
warming/carbon-trading  cadres  who  were  previously  staunch  opponents.
For  example,  Patrick  Moore,  a  cofounder  of  Greenpeace  who  rose  to
prominence in the 1960s for his strong stand against nuclear testing, told the
House  Government  Reform  Subcommittee  on  Energy  and  Resources  in
April  2005,  “Nuclear  energy  is  the  only  non-greenhouse-gas-emitting
power source that can effectively replace fossils and satisfy global demand
for energy.”68

Nuclear plant operators are poised to reap billions of dollars in windfall
profits  if  carbon  cap-and-trade  legislation  is  enacted.  Those  who  stand  to
gain most include the Exelon Corp.; FPL Group Inc.; Constellation Energy
Group;  Entergy  Corp.;  FirstEnergy  Corp.;  NRG  Energy,  Inc.;  and  Public
Service Enterprise Group Inc. They will gain in two ways. First, they won’t
have to purchase emission allowances, giving them an advantage over fossil
fuel–dependent  companies.  Cap-andtrade  will  also  push  wholesale
electricity  prices  higher  in  deregulated  markets,  as  coal-  and  natural  gas–
burning utilities jack up charges to their customers, making nuclear energy
even more competitive.69

Yet, notwithstanding its appealing features for dreaded GHG avoidance
and  windfall  cap-and-trade  profits  that  will  raise  energy  costs  to  promote
conservation,  nuclear  power  continues  to  have  powerful  environmental
opponents.  The  Sierra  Club,  for  example,  remains  strictly  antinuclear,
although its position has vacillated over time. During the 1960s, when the
group  was  lobbying  against  big  hydroelectric  projects  it  believed  were
damaging California wilderness areas, its slogan was “Atoms, not Dams.”
In 1970, its board voted in favor of nuclear plants, such as one in Diablo
Canyon, and issued a “crisis report” requesting that irrigation districts build
and manage a nuclear plant for the city of San Francisco rather than another
planned hydropower dam. Then, 5 years later, the board reversed its policy,
began  to  oppose  nuclear  plants,  and  lobbied  to  shut  down  the  Diablo
Canyon plant.70

While  the  United  States  has  refrained  from  reprocessing  spent  fuels,
some other countries are combining the plutonium oxide that is chemically
separated from spent fuels with plutonium from warheads to create a low-
enriched  (about  4.5  percent)  power  reactor  fuel  referred  to  as  “MOX.”
Europeans have been doing this for more than 20 years, reducing stockpiled
weapons-grade  plutonium  in  the  process.  World  stockpiles  of  nuclear

warhead plutonium, now estimated to be about 260 metric tons, offer the
potential to provide 1 year’s worth of global uranium needs for electricity.
MOX  will  eventually  be  produced  from  plutonium  and  highly  enriched
uranium  obtained  from  dismantled  weapons  at  the  DOE’s  Savanna  River
site in South Carolina. Yet antinuclear groups oppose the manufacturing and
use of MOX, even though it converts war materials into energy for essential
and  peaceful  uses.  Turning  weapons  stockpiles  into  low-enriched  and
proliferation-resistant fuel would seem to be a purpose that everyone might
support.

Many Americans tend to be quite unaware of just how much our nation
depends upon nuclear power and of the industry’s long, impressive safety
record  throughout  the  world.  This  ignorance,  based  heavily  upon  widely
circulated media misconceptions and strident opposition campaigns, thwarts
progress in addressing vital energy priorities. Informed education is key to
progress.

Other  countries,  including  France  and  Finland,  educate  children  about
nuclear  power  from  early  years  so  they  grow  up  to  have  realistic
perspectives. It took France only 2 decades to switch over 80 percent of its
electricity generation to nuclear, and now many of that nation’s informed
young  people  have  grown  up  to  become  leaders  in  nuclear  power
technology  development.  The  world’s  most  advanced  experimental
thermonuclear  fusion  reactor  is  under  construction  in  Cadarache,  France,
and the country—with fifty-nine nuclear plants already—is the largest net
exporter  of  electrical  power.  The  French  reprocess  spent  fuels  and  are
developing  a  deep  underground 
repository  at
Meuse/Haute  Marne.  The  DOE  has  purchased  MOX  fuel  fabrication
services  from  France  to  convert  plutonium  from  dismantled  bombs  to
electrical plant fuel, as have other countries.71

radioactive  waste 

Isn’t  it  unfortunate  that  our  nation,  which  pioneered  the  science  and
technology  to  harness  atomic  power  for  war,  must  now  turn  to  another
country for the technology to convert those weapons into fuel for peaceful
use? How politically correct is that?

NUCLEAR WASTE STORAGE—NOT IN MY MOUNTAIN!
After  more  than  $10  billion  spent  so  far  in  developing  the  national
Yucca Mountain nuclear waste repository that Nevada once advocated, the

project has now been canceled by the Obama-Biden administration thanks
to strong political opposition from the state and environmental lobbies. But
this has not always been the case.72 Back in the 1970s, Nevada legislators
actually  authored  a  bid  to  create  a  national  waste  repository  within  the
nuclear test site in order to create thousands of jobs. This would help the
state  recover  from  a  loss  of  federal  money  following  the  termination  of
nuclear device tests and related employee layoffs. By the 1980s, they didn’t
need or want it anymore.

A  rapidly  expanding  gambling  industry  created  about  five  hundred
thousand new jobs, along with Nevada representatives with louder voices
and  national  clout.  In  2007,  Harry  Reid  rose  to  the  position  of  Senate
majority  leader  and  became  a  powerful  project  opponent,  stating,  “It  is
abundantly  clear  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  ‘sound  science’  at  Yucca
Mountain.”73

State  of  Nevada  representatives,  along  with  various  anti-repository
groups,  accused  the  project  of  fraud,  asserting  that  some  United  States
Geological  Survey  scientists  had  suggested  in  e-mail  exchanges  that  they
had fabricated research data. A US attorney dismissed the charges in 2006,
ruling that the brouhaha had resulted from a misunderstanding.74

It’s 

somewhat  bewildering 

Still,  Nevada  needs  nuclear  power.  Las  Vegas  and  its  millions  of  neon
lights have depended for decades upon hydroelectricity from the Colorado
River. Now a prolonged drought, which may continue, is creating electrical
shortages as well as shrinking the city’s water supply and economic future.75
the  Obama-Biden
administration would announce that the government would guarantee more
than  $8  billion  in  loans  needed  to  build  the  first  two  US  nuclear  power
plants in nearly 3 decades at nearly the same time it announced it would
drop  plans  to  proceed  with  the  Yucca  Mountain  waste  repository  and
consider what it believes are “better options.”76

to  ponder  why 

Termination of the repository will predictably hobble efforts to build “a
new  generation  of  safe,  clean  nuclear  power  plants”  as  presented  in  the
president’s first State of the Union address. Without a permanent solution
for nuclear waste storage, several states, including California, won’t let new
plants  be  built.  And  as  Michael  Morris,  chief  executive  of  American
Electric  Power,  contends,  “There  has  to  be  a  reaction”  to  the  closing
because Yucca is the only site that has been vetted and deemed capable of
storing waste from the nation’s 104 operating reactors.77

Nuclear electrical power expansion is a necessity—not an option. While
nuclear power is not typically characterized as an alternative energy source,
in reality it is the only alternative other than fossils that offers substantial
expansion  potential.  The  Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission  anticipates  that
more than thirty reactor projects will finally be seeking licensing permits.
Following a lengthy approval process, each will require about 4 to 5 years
to build, at a cost of between $6 billion and $10 billion per reactor.78

Although  these  plants  produce  only  water  vapor  emissions,  radioactive
waste containment and releases due to accidents or terrorism are issues of
public  concern.  Safety  records  at  nuclear  facilities  have  been  excellent,
however, and technology advancements are further reducing risks and any
potential  consequences.  Waste  problems  could  be  reduced  by  recycling
spent  materials  using  breeder  reactors,  but  this  approach  was  outlawed
during 
to  concerns  about
proliferation of weapons-grade fuel that might get into enemy hands. Given
that  there  are  much  more  efficient  and  terrorist-accesible  ways  to  obtain
bomb  materials  from  maverick  foreign  government  sources,  there  is  little
current basis for such prohibitions.

the  Carter-Mondale  administration  due 

Alternative Futures

 

It  is  essential  to  our  national  and  global  future  that  development  and
utilization  of  all  alternative  energy  options  continue.  This  includes
improvement and expansion of nuclear power and innovations to produce
cleaner energy from coal and other fossil-fuel sources for which there is no
practical substitute.

It  is  also  vital  that  the  public  be  much  better  informed  about  the
comparative  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  all  alternatives,  and  that
public  policy  decisions  be  more  fully  guided  by  the  facts.  Performance
benefits of unproven options such as cellulosic ethanol have been claimed
but  not  demonstrated.  Expansion  limitations  of  other  options  have  been
obfuscated, leading many to believe that abundant replacements for fossil-
fuel  sources  are  available  but  neglected  by  the  energy  industry.  Green
energy  has  become  a  meaningless  term  because  the  environmental
consequences of most alternatives have been ignored and misrepresented in
marketing  campaigns  and  in  the  media.  Fossil-dependent  fuels  have  been

mischaracterized  as  “sustainable.”  Examples  are  ethanol,  which  requires
fuel for farming and processing, and hydrogen, derived from natural gas.

2

Proposed carbon-emission cap-and-trade legislation predicated on global
warming hysteria and the demonization of CO
 will solve nothing. It will
only  constrain  new  power  plant  development,  making  energy  more
expensive.  Although  resulting  shortages  and  price  escalations  may
eventually  promote  support  for  much-needed  nuclear  power  expansion,
permitting and development of those vital plant infrastructures must begin
immediately to keep the lights burning.

But if any green will be realized through carbon trading, it will primarily
move  from  pockets  of  consumers—through  paying  increased  power,  fuel
processing,  and  product  costs—to  the  bank  accounts  of  hedge  fund
speculators and subsidy recipients. Let our current ethanol experiences be a
lesson.79

Section Four

Retaking America’s Future

Chapter 10

REENERGIZING FREE ENTERPRISE

Bureaucracy protecting the planet from carbon hoofprints

America’s energy progress has been held hostage to political and
legal pressures applied by groups its citizens did not elect to represent the
future best interests of their children and grandchildren. Vilification of CO
as a pollutant, burning fossils as a climate cooker, and oil dependence as a
security threat offers means to justify many ends. All provide the rationale
to promote carbon-offset-trading bonanzas, to subsidize alternative-energy
pricing  advantages,  to  advance  ideological  social-engineering  agendas,  to
validate political and governmental power grabs, and to serve global wealth
distribution agendas. These motives are championed beneath banners whose

2

slogans promise salvation from environmental guilt, essentials for resource
conservation,  energy  independence,  and  most  recently,  creation  of  green
jobs by legislative fiat.

Global warming supporters seem to be loudest in their assault on the use
of fossils, which ironically will necessarily be our most important source of
energy  for  the  foreseeable  future.  Let’s  examine  how  the  climate  change
lobby has acted to keep this key to our energy security buried.

Coal: That Ol’ Black Magic

 

Al Gore calls for a bold new energy policy. All US electricity will soon
be provided by wind, solar, and other renewable sources, and reliance upon
fossils  will  end.  But  beyond  the  superheated  greenhouse  atmosphere  of
Planet  Gore,  real-world  circumstances  are  likely  to  be  dramatically
different. Nuclear power, conspicuously absent in Gore’s vision, is the only
serious  non-fossil  contender  to  add  electricity  capacity,  and  coal,  the
implicitly denigrated fossil, represents the only practical hope to reduce oil
and natural gas dependence for liquid fuel.1

Despite our enormous dependence upon coal for electricity, heating, and
important by-products, coal industries have been unfairly characterized as
“dirty businesses.” Global warming alarmism is now fueling a heightened
wave  of  environmental  activism  that  is  blocking  new  developments,
particularly for electricity generation. Many proposed coal-fired plants are
being  canceled  by  states  from  coast  to  coast  as  stringent  CO
  emission
restrictions deny permits, produce legal challenges, and make construction
and operational costs prohibitively high.

Coal is the largest source of worldwide electrical power generation, and
coke from coal processing is a vital component in the reduction of iron ore.
We  are  fortunate  in  the  US  to  have  relatively  abundant  reserves:  an
estimated 250-year supply, compared with perhaps only a few decades for
oil  and  natural  gas.  The  US  Geological  Survey  projects  that  US  reserves
contain  about  1.7  trillion  tons  of  identified  deposits;  many  geologists
believe that future discoveries may more than double that amount. Not all is
readily  recoverable,  however,  due  to  technology  limitations,  high  access
costs,  and  environmental  restrictions.  Total  recoverable  reserves  are
estimated  to  be  about  472  billion  tons,  but  because  current  mining

2

2

2

2

in 

technologies  leave  substantial  amounts  in  place,  near-term  recoverable
assets are estimated to be about 262 billion tons. This may be more than
one-fourth of the world’s total recoverable supply.2

Uncontrolled coal burning releases many substances that none of us want
in our environment, including sulfur and a variety of heavy metals such as
arsenic  and  lead.  And  there  is  no  question  that  surface  mining  has  had
destructive  impacts  upon  site  land  areas,  has  polluted  waters,  and  has
destroyed natural habitats. These are very real and serious issues that the
coal  industry  must  address.  This  has  begun  to  happen.  Relatively  simple
and inexpensive “clean coal” technologies are available to remove most of
the SO
, smoke-producing oxides of nitrogen oxide (including nitric oxide,
nitrogen  dioxide,  and  nitrous  oxide),  and  particulate  emissions  from  the
coal-burning  process 
through  chemical  washing,
gasification,  and  special  treatments  of  flue  gases  before  they  are  emitted.
Processes to capture, transport, and store CO
  are  much  more  costly  and,
arguably, irrelevant.

is  accomplished 

Just how clean is clean coal? It can be washed and gasified to burn quite
the
cleanly,  with  most  offensive  residual  particulates  captured 
incineration venting process. CO
, which is much more difficult to collect
and contain, has come to be vilified as a polluting coal-burning by-product
solely on the basis of dubiously claimed climate influences.

The  clean  coal  technology  field  is  moving  rapidly  toward  gasification,
which  breaks  coal  down  into  its  basic  chemical  components  rather  than
burning  it  directly.  Modern  gasifiers  expose  the  coal  to  hot  steam  and
carefully controlled amounts of air or oxygen under high temperatures and
pressures.  This  breaks  the  carbon  molecules  apart  through  chemical
reactions  that  produce  carbon  monoxide,  hydrogen,  and  other  gaseous
compounds that burn cleanly. Hydrogen gas, in fact, has been used to drive
electricity-generating turbines, with enhanced fuel-efficiency outputs of up
to 60 percent.

With regard to environmental damage from mining, the largest problem
has been associated with open-pit excavation, which accounts for about 60
percent  of  total  US  recovery.  This  method  is  primarily  used  in  western
regions  where  near-surface  deposits  can  be  up  to  a  hundred  feet  thick;
underground mining, which presents greater risks to human safety, is mostly
applied east of the Mississippi in the Appalachian states. The April 5, 2010,

explosion in the Upper Big Branch mine in Montcoal, West Virginia, which
killed twenty-five workers, serves as a tragic example.

Open-pit  operations  are  now  typically  required  to  post  bonds  for  each
acre of surface mined, and later to restore the soils as nearly as possible to
original  contours  with  native  vegetation  and  trees.  More  than  2  million
acres  of  coal  land  have  been  restored  in  this  manner  over  the  past  2
decades.3

Regardless of growing opposition by the Sierra Club and other activist
combatants  beating  global  warming  war  drums,  the  demand  for  coal  can
only increase. US utilities currently burn more than 9 billion tons annually
in more than six hundred plants, and coal’s share of electricity generation is
projected  to  grow  about  60  percent  over  the  next  2  decades.  While  the
Sierra  Club  alone  continues  to  spend  many  millions  of  dollars  in  legal
actions to block coal-fired plants, the nation has no other significant power
growth  option  other  than  nuclear.  Utilities  certainly  know  this.  The  vast
majority  of  the  American  public  will  ultimately  learn  this  also,  and
hopefully in time to prevent disruptive shortages.4

“Clean  coal”  plants  that  convert  coal  into  a  combustible  gas  for  utility
generation  are  now  being  blocked  and  canceled.  For  example,  a  hearing
judge at the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission urged commissioners to
reject a plan for the Northern States Power Company, a unit of Xcel Energy,
Inc.,  to  purchase  8  percent  of  its  energy  from  a  coal  gasification  plant
proposed by Excelsior Energy Inc. He concluded that it wouldn’t be good
for customers because it would cost an extra $472 million in 2011 dollars to
make the plant capable of capturing about 30 percent of its CO
 emissions,
plus another $635 million to build a pipeline to carry the CO
 to the nearest
available deep geological storage in Alberta, Canada. This would inflate the
cost of power by $50 per megawatt hour, making it twice as costly as older,
exempted plants.5

Potential federal carbon-emission cap-and-trade legislation has added to
coal development miseries by discouraging investment financing. Citigroup
Inc.,  JP  Morgan  Chase  &  Co.,  and  Morgan  Stanley  all  report  that
uncertainties about what these prospective regulations will mandate present
big risks that are forcing conservative bank strategies. Under new “Carbon
Principles,” the banks are requiring companies applying for coal-fired plant
financing  to  show  that  they’ve  first  looked  at  “energy  efficiency”  and
“renewable  energy  options”  and  found  them  to  be  insufficient.  They  also

2

2

2

2

demand  evidence  that  proposed  plants  are  being  designed  to  capture  and
 emissions, while still charging high enough electricity
eventually store CO
rates  to  pay  for  extra  emission  allowances  needed  to  cover  CO
-capping
penalties.6

In July 2007, Citigroup downgraded coal mining company stocks, noting
that “prophesies of a new wave of coal-fired generation have vaporized.”
Steve Leer, CEO of Arch Coal, Inc., said that some of the power plants they
had  expected  to  build  “may  get  stalled  due  to  uncertainty  over  climate
concerns.”7

In  January  2008,  the  DOE  announced  a  $648  million  federal  plan  to
restructure  its  FutureGen  project  aimed  at  demonstrating  cutting-edge
carbon capture and storage (CCS) technology at multiple commercial-scale,
integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) clean coal power plants. Its
goal  is  to  at  least  double  the  amount  of  CO
  sequestered  over  a  previous
technology  approach  announced  in  2003.  This  was  the  largest  amount
requested  for  the  DOE’s  coal  program  in  more  than  25  years.  Under  the
plan, the DOE’s investment will provide funding only for the CCS power
plant  component—not  the  entire  construction—beginning  as  plants  are
commissioned  between  2015  and  2016,  subject  to  site  environmental
impact statement approvals.8

2

2

Acting upon a US Supreme Court ruling issued in 2007 that required the
EPA  to  regulate  CO
  emissions  under  the  Clean  Air  Act,  a  Georgia  state
court ruled in 2008 that a planned 1,200 MW coal plant could not be built
until emission standards are met. Bruce Nilles, a Sierra Club lawyer, was
elated:  “This  will  further  accelerate  the  beginning  of  the  end  of  the  coal
push.” Mr. Nilles also lauded the denial of a permit for a planned coal-fired
plant in Kansas, stating, “In 2008 we will really begin to act on stopping the
majority of these plants.”9

Wall  Street  remains  cautious  regarding  any  assumptions  that  advanced
clean  coal  technologies  will  meet  yet-to-be  determined  CO
  cap  emission
allowances,  and  it  is  nervous  about  the  extent  to  which  the  federal
government (that is, we taxpayers) will be willing to pay the differences.
Wall Street is, after all, in business to make money, not to keep our lights on
and businesses open.

During the recent $32 billion private equity purchase of TXU Corp., the
buyers  decided  to  eliminate  eight  of  eleven  planned  coal-fired  plants  in
Texas  following  aggressive  environmental  lobbying  by  actor  Robert

2

Redford  and  others.  Reversals  have  also  occurred  in  Florida,  North
Carolina,  Oregon,  and  other  states;  nearly  two  dozen  projects  have  been
canceled since 2006. Some projects perished because permits were denied
and others because court challenges deterred investor financing.

Coal  has  powerful  opponents  in  the  US  Congress  as  well.  Senate
Majority  Leader  Harry  Reid,  who  has  worked  hard  to  derail  nuclear
development and construction of the Yucca Mountain waste repository in
Nevada,  has  also  fought  against  the  creation  of  three  proposed  coal-fired
plants  in  his  state.  Since  Nevada  doesn’t  have  hydropower,  this  raises
concerns  among  others  about  just  how  Nevada  will  meet  its  future
electricity  requirements—particularly  at  night  and  when  the  wind  isn’t
blowing. As Doug Fischer, a utilities analyst with the investment firm AG
Edwards, observed, coal opponents, including Reid, could “put us in a bind
where we’re not going to have the energy we need.”10

Coal-to-Liquid: Wringing Out Diesel and Jet Fuel

 

Coal  offers  the  potential  to  substantially  reduce  dependence  upon
domestic and foreign oil for automotive and aviation fuel. This isn’t a new
idea, and the technology to do so is well proven. Petroleum poor, Germany
fueled its Nazi World War II war machine primarily on coal-derived diesel.
South  Africa  generates  about  40  percent  of  its  automotive  fuel  from  coal
and natural gas, using processes it developed to meet energy needs during
its isolation under apartheid.11

Coal-to-liquid synthetic fuel development also has a long history in the
US. It began when Congress passed a Synthetic Liquid Fuels Act in 1944
that  authorized  $30  million  to  study  the  construction  and  operation  of
demonstration plants to produce liquid fuels from oil shale, agricultural and
forestry products, and other substances. Soon afterward, some members of
Congress  and  administration  officials  urged  that  the  oil  industry  be
encouraged  to  construct  a  coal-to-liquid  demonstration  plant,  but  without
success. Oil executives resisted, arguing that synthetic fuels would not be
competitive with crude oil.

Undaunted, the US Bureau of Mines proceeded with an initiative of its
own.  With  assistance  from  some  captured  German  scientists,  the  agency
contracted  with  the  Bechtel  Corporation  to  convert  a  synthetic  ammonia

plant into a coal hydrogenation facility. By 1949, the fully operational plant
was processing lignite into 200 bbl/d of diesel fuel. It later used bituminous
coal  as  the  feedstock.  Then,  between  1949  and  1953,  the  demonstration
plant  produced  1.5  million  gallons  of  78-octane  unleaded  coal-derived
gasoline.12

In 1948, the US depended upon foreign oil imports for more than half of
all  its  domestic  needs.  By  the  mid-1950s,  America’s  energy  sights  had
shifted  toward  the  giant  oil  fields  of  the  Middle  East.  National  political
interests followed, driving large deals with Persian oil sheiks. During that
same  period,  the  US  Carbide  and  Carbon  Chemical  Company  (later
renamed  Union  Carbide)  built  and  operated  the  first  private  US  coal
hydrogenation  plant  at  Institute,  West  Virginia,  and  began  to  process  300
tons of coal daily into a variety of chemicals. But US interest in synthetic
fuels was already fading. In 1953, a Republican-led House Appropriations
Committee  killed  funding  for  synthetic  fuel  plants,  claiming  that  the
product  prices  were  too  high.  It  was  widely  believed  that  this  decision
resulted from pressures by oil companies that didn’t want competition from
coal or other alternatives. In any case, the US Bureau of Mines’ operation in
Missouri went back to processing ammonia for military uses.13

Price has been a major stumbling block for coal-to-liquid development
ever since the 1980s, when costs for crude oil stabilized at low levels. This
situation may now be rapidly changing. In 2005, Energy Secretary Samuel
W.  Bodman  contacted  the  National  Coal  Council,  a  federal  advisory
committee, requesting that it draft a report detailing the role coal can play in
the near future. In its response, the council found that “application of coal-
to-liquids technologies would move the United States toward greater energy
security  and  relieve  cost  and  supply  pressures  on  transportation  fuels  by
producing  2.6  MM  bbl/d  [2.6  million  barrels  per  day]  of  liquids.  These
steps would enhance US oil supply by 10 percent and utilize an additional
475 million tons of coal per year.”14

According to a June 5, 2006, MoneyWeek report, “Breakeven for a coal-
toliquids  plant  in  the  US  would  be  in  the  range  of  $39–44  a  barrel,
assuming no tax incentives,” a lot lower than we are likely to see again. Yet
obtaining financing for large projects remains a major obstacle due in large
part 
  emission–capping
legislation.15

regarding  prospective  CO

to  uncertainties 

2

Proposals to convert coal to liquid fuel for automotive use have powerful
congressional  opponents  because  they  compete  with  biofuel  lobbies  and
proponents.  In  February  2007,  House  Republicans  moved  to  recommit  a
biofuels research bill back to committee, with instructions to include coal
synfuels as an “alternative fuel.” The motion failed to carry; voting went
along party lines. Then in March, Senator Inhofe tried to amend a Senate
bill that was calling for implementation of recommendations presented in
the 9-11 Commission by attaching billions of dollars for liquid coal in the
name of national security. Senator Lieberman used his power as the 9-11
bill sponsor to prevent Senator Inhofe from introducing the amendment. A
key  argument  was  that  liquid  fuel  from  coal  would  not  reduce  CO
  over
emission  levels  produced  by  petroleum.16  So  global  warming  trumped
energy priorities once again.

2

The Dirty Side of the Liquid Fuel Debate

 

America, characterized by some as the “Saudi Arabia of coal,” enjoys
an enviable opportunity to fully utilize this natural benefit for liquid fuel as
well as electrical power. Yet powerful environmental organizations such as
the  Natural  Resources  Defense  Council  oppose  all  coal  development
programs, including conversion to liquid fuels. The NRDC states, “Relying
on  liquid  coal  as  an  alternative  fuel  could  nearly  double  global  warming
pollution  per  gallon  of  transportation  fuels  and  increase  the  devastating
effects of coal mining felt by communities and ecosystems stretching from
Appalachia to the Rocky Mountains.”17

Given  that  no  energy  alternative  is  immune  from  strong  environmental
impact  criticisms,  and  that  such  objections  can  be  directed  to  most  all
human activities, let’s put that argument aside for consideration elsewhere.
Let’s also take the “global warming pollution” argument at face value and
assume that CO
 is really dreadful stuff. In that case, how does liquid coal
actually compare with other fuels?

The  NRDC  asserts  that  coal  is  a  “carbon-intensive  fuel,  containing
almost double the amount of carbon per unit of energy compared to natural
gas  and  20  percent  more  than  petroleum.”  It  argues  that  liquid  coal  use
actually  produces  two  different  CO
  streams:  one  from  the  plant  that
produces it and the other from engine exhaust. The NRDC acknowledges

2

2

2

that  vehicle  CO
  emissions  are  comparable  for  liquid  coal  and  other
transportation  fuels  and  that  those  produced  from  liquid  coal  processing
plants  are  much  higher  than  those  that  refine  crude  oil  into  gasoline  and
diesel. It then estimates that if 90 percent of the CO
 from liquid plants is
captured,  instead  of  released  into  the  atmosphere,  “wheel-to-wheel
emissions from coal-derived liquid fuels would [still] be 8 percent higher
than for petroleum.”18

And the NRDC’s solution? A Securing America report jointly published
by the NRDC and the Institute for the Analysis of Global Security found
that “a combination of more efficient cars, trucks, and planes; biofuels; and
smart growth transportation options can cut oil dependence by more than 3
million bbl/d in 10 years and achieve cuts of more than 11 million bbl/d by
2025.”19

2

2

Okay.  So  we  don’t  really  need  that  oil  after  all?  The  Idaho  National
Laboratory  conducted  a  study  of  environmental  aspects  of  coal-to-liquid
technology  in  connection  with  Baard  Energy’s  Ohio  River  Clean  Fuels
project under development in Wellsville, Ohio, that produced conclusions
different from those presented by NRDC. The results showed that coal-to-
liquid fuels would yield 46 percent fewer emissions of CO
 and other GHGs
than conventional low-sulfur diesel transportation fuels when a 30 percent
biomass  co-feed,  CSS,  and  a  combined  cycle  cogeneration  process  was
used. All emission reductions were measured on a wheels-to-wheels basis
using a testing model developed at the Argonne National Laboratory. The
study  also  found  that  the  coal-derived  fuel  was  virtually  sulfur  free,
contained  20  percent  less  nitrogen  oxide  than  did  standard  diesel,  and
reduced both particulate and volatile organic compound emissions by close
to 20 percent.20

The  NRDC  seems  to  have  no  real  problems  concerning  CO

  and  other
emissions  associated  with  the  biofuels,  which  it  and  many  other
environmental activist groups advocate. However, using the same logic it
applies to coal-derived fuels, that isn’t quite fair. Consider the refineries that
process the crude oil into diesel to fuel the tractors that plant and harvest the
corn.  They  release  CO
,  sulfur,  and  particulate  emissions.  And  the  plants
that produce the fertilizer … what about them? Then there is the issue of the
emissions from the natural gas or other fuels that create the heat to process
the corn into alcohol. That should count. And recall that lots of water and
power are needed for crop irrigation and processing—those are resources

2

2

too—not to mention the damage caused to the land and ecosystems from
the farming … all those trees lost that could be absorbing climate-killing
CO

. Where’s the justice?
The  US  is  lagging  behind  in  the  area  of  vital  coal-to-liquid  fuel
development, due to environmental obstructionism. Still, there is hope that
the  US  private  sector  can  begin  to  make  some  progress  against  strong
currents of bureaucratic resistance and perils of uncertain carbon-emission
legislation.  DKRW  Advanced  Fuels  and  Arch  Coal,  Inc.,  plan  to  begin
construction  on  a  coal-to-liquid  plant  in  Wyoming  using  technologies
licensed by General Electric and ExxonMobil. Product costs are estimated
to be about $67–$82/barrel based upon the experiences of Sasol, a South
African coal, oil, and chemicals firm. That range depends upon the costs of
water and coal for the water- and power-intensive process. Unfortunately,
there is no free energy lunch anywhere.

Ironically,  China,  the  world’s  largest  atmospheric  coal-fired  polluter,  is
becoming the leading implementer of cleaner advanced coal-to-liquid fuel
technologies that will advance progress toward oil conservation. Unlike the
US, Australia, and India, all of which are interested in coal but constrained
by environmental lobbies, China is building the world’s largest coal-derived
plant  complex  in  the  grasslands  of  Inner  Mongolia.  The  plant,  which  is
being  developed  through  an  agreement  with  Sasol,  will  annually  convert
about 3.5 million tons of coal into 1 million tons of oil products, such as
diesel fuel for automobiles. This amounts to about 20,000 bbl/d, compared
with the estimated 7.2 million bbl/d of oil that China currently consumes.21

This level of production is tiny compared with China’s demands, but it is
only  the  beginning.  Inner  Mongolia—twice  as  large  as  France,  Germany,
and England combined—contains China’s biggest coalfield, and the region
may be able to yield 50 million tons of liquid fuel per year by 2020. This
equates to about 286,000 barrels, about 4 percent of China’s needs based
upon  present  consumption.  The  state-owned  Shenhua  Group  that,  along
with  Sasol,  oversees  the  project  is  also  conducting  feasibility  studies  for
two more coal-to-liquid plants in the Shaanxi and Ningxia provinces.

2

that 

China  realizes 

its  future  energy  security  demands  reduced
dependence upon foreign oil imports, just as ours does, and is prepared to
invest accordingly. In 2003, China imported about 100 million tons of oil,
and  booming  economic  and  industrial  expansion,  along  with  growth  in
private  automobile  ownership,  is  creating  rapidly  expanding  demand

pressures. While coal-to-liquid processing has long been too expensive to
be price competitive with standard crude oil, this condition is changing. The
Chinese will also market sulfur extracted from the process to offset costs, as
well as hydrogen, another by-product, for fuel cell power applications.

Chinese  and  South  African  partners  will  be  in  positions  to  provide
advanced coal-to-liquid technologies to other nations, rich and poor alike,
willing to forgo presently cheaper crude for enhanced, longer-term energy
security. Similar technologies can also be used to produce liquid fuels from
natural gas, which is even more economical than coal processing is. Sasol is
now switching its liquid fuel feedstock to natural gas in its South African
plant. The process will also compete with evolving technology to extract oil
from tar sands, which is being expanded in Canada and now accounts for
about one-quarter of that country’s automotive fuel.22

Any  predictions  that  coal-to-liquid  technologies  will  offer  a  substantial
solution  to  US  oil  and  natural  gas  dependence  would  be  premature  and
speculative. Likewise, these technologies may ultimately not even prove to
be the best use of valuable coal resources. Advancements in battery design,
for example, may enable clean coal to be used more directly and efficiently
for power to recharge greatly improved electric vehicles. The free market,
not government, will decide. Or will it?

Increasingly,  federal  and  state  governments  are  determining  which
alternatives  will  prevail.  Some  receive  tax-supported  subsidies  and
consumer  cost-burdening  mandates,  while  others  are  penalized  by
regulatory  disincentives 
investment  and  competitive
profitability.  Decisions  that  will  have  critical  impacts  upon  future  energy
security are being predicated on enormously theoretical climate models and
unsupportable  alarmist  premises.  Alternatives  with  broadly  recognized
capacity limitations gain favor in the balance.

that 

inhibit 

Coal isn’t going to win any beauty pageants based upon sex appeal. It
isn’t photogenic like wind turbines filmed against azure blue skies, mirrored
sunbeam  reflections  on  large  solar  panels,  and  verdant  corn  farmlands.
Instead, picture decapitated hills; huge, black rock piles; monstrous earth-
chomping equipment, Caterpillar vehicles; and grimy-looking workers who
have  nothing  better  to  do  with  their  lives  than  keep  your  computer  and
household appliances powered up. Not very glamorous at all.

Now picture your home dark and cold. Imagine that you’re not going to
work  today  because  businesses  are  closed  (but  you  couldn’t  have  gotten

there  anyway  because  your  car’s  fuel  tank  is  empty  and  public  transit
schedules are sporadic). Hope that tomorrow will be windy and sunny; that
corn-fueled  food  prices  will  drop;  and  that  global  warming  is  real  and
doesn’t bypass your neighborhood. Isn’t that dirty coal beginning to look a
lot better?

Oil and Gas: Natural Realities

The  US  is  experiencing  a  two-part  strategic  and  practical  dilemma
regarding oil and natural gas development. On one hand, it is irresponsible
not to conserve use of dwindling global supplies that may be substantially
depleted  before  children  attending  kindergarten  today  reach  typical
retirement  ages.  It  is  unthinkable  to  bankrupt  vital  resources  for  future
generations.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  foolish  and  perilous  not  to  begin
developing US reserves now. This is necessary to ensure that fuel will be
available  to  sustain  families,  commerce,  and  our  larger  economy  decades
hence.

Conflicting  priorities  regarding  near-term  energy  sufficiency,  long-term
sustainability,  environmental  issues,  and  fossils  versus  alternatives  are
producing  raging  disputes  over  oil  and  natural  gas  drilling  initiatives.
Current  federal  and  state  government  environmental  policies  make  large
natural  reserves  in  ANWR,  the  Rocky  Mountain  basins,  the  Outer
Continental Shelf (OCS) of the East and West coasts, and the eastern Gulf
of Mexico off-limits or severely restricted.

If we can’t drill our way out of a looming energy crisis, we also can’t
wish  our  way  out  with  sunshine  collectors,  moonshine  alcohol,  or
blowhard-style wind power projections. While US politicians dither about
global warming dangers posed by fossil-fuel use, other nations are forging
strategic energy alliances to corner global supplies.

 

 

Regulations: Drilling in Troubled Waters

Since  offshore  drilling  is  particularly  challenging  and  expensive,  it
demands long lead times and large long-term investments before products
and  industry  profits  materialize  a  decade  or  more  later.  Opponents  argue
that  this  delayed  condition  is  a  good  reason  not  to  drill,  because  benefits

won’t  occur  rapidly  enough.  As  Senator  Richard  Durbin  (D-IL)  declared,
“We can’t drill our way to lower prices.”23

About  85  percent  of  America’s  OCS,  a  region  where  big  oil  and  gas
discoveries have been occurring, is currently off-limits to drilling. In June
2008,  then-President  George  W.  Bush  urged  a  Democrat-controlled  US
Congress  to  lift  a  ban  that  would  open  up  twelve  restricted  OCS  areas,
including  two  off  Alaska,  two  off  the  Pacific  coast,  three  in  the  Gulf  of
Mexico,  and  three  along  the  Atlantic  coast—all  subject  to  approval  by
coastal  state  legislators.  This  plan  responded  to  a  public  outcry  about
alarmingly  high  gasoline  prices  at  that  time.  The  following  September,
Congress  allowed  some  restrictive  legislation  to  lapse,  opening  up  8.3
million acres in central and eastern Gulf of Mexico areas. President Obama
indefinitely  postponed  that  plan  soon  after  assuming  office  in  February
2009.

If  some  influential  Democratic  Senate  and  House  members  have  their
way,  much  of  the  OCS  will  be  permanently  off-limits  to  drilling.  On
February 21, 2006, California senators Barbara Boxer and Dianne Feinstein
(both  D-CA) 
in
sponsoring  a  California  Ocean  and  Coastal  Protection  Act  that  would
“provide permanent protection for the California coast from future drilling
and  from  efforts  to  assess  and  inventory  oil  and  gas  reserves  off  the
coastline.”24

joined  with  Congresswoman  Lois  Capps  (D-CA) 

Democratic  coastal  state  resistance  to  offshore  drilling  immediately
stiffened  and  expanded  following  the  disastrous  April  20,  2010,  BP
Deepwater Horizon rig explosion and oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico. About
three  weeks  later,  on  May  13,  Democratic  senators  Maria  Cantwell  and
Patty Murray from Washington, along with senators Ron Wyden and Jeff
Merkley from Oregon, joined with senators Boxer and Feinstein to extend
the  offshore  ban  to  include  their  states.  Their  proposal  would  amend  the
Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act. Senator Cantwell explained, “We must
act to safeguard our precious coastal waters and our dangerous addiction to
fossils . . . It is simply unacceptable to risk irreparable harm to our coastal
communities, economies and ecosystems just to feed our addictions with a
short-term fix—especially when new technologies are emerging that give us
real alternatives.”25

Let’s hope those new, emerging alternatives arrive soon. California crude
oil currently accounts for only about 37 percent of what the state consumes:

roughly  44  million  gallons  of  gasoline  and  10  million  gallons  of  diesel
every day. The state’s crude oil production has decreased 23 percent since
1996.  Beginning  in  1994,  its  refineries  received  more  imported  oil  from
other states than was produced from California reserves.26

Public  commitment  to  protecting  coastal  waters  and  shores  from  all
possible  drilling  calamity  risks  is  a  rational  necessity.  Yet  also  consider
increased  risks  associated  with  protectionist  legislative  policies  that  drive
drilling operations many miles farther out and thousands of feet deeper to
add  hazards,  complexities,  and  costs.  A  similar  technical  failure  to  the
Deepwater  Horizon  event  occurring  in  closer-in,  shallower  waters  would
have been a much quicker and easier fix, with greatly contained impact. It
would also have been much less likely to occur in the first place.

Since 1992, American oil companies have drilled more than twenty-one
hundred wells in the Gulf of Mexico at depths greater than a thousand feet.
These were extremely expensive to construct, each typically costing $100
million or more, and often they haven’t been successful. But sometimes the
oil  companies  did  get  very  lucky.  In  September  2006,  for  example,
Chevron,  Devon  Energy,  and  Norway’s  Statoil  ASA  announced  that  their
Jack  No.  2  deepwater  well  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  might  have  opened  up
access to 15 billion barrels of oil, enough to boost US strategic reserves by
50 percent. The find is located in a region called the “lower tertiary trend”
about 270 miles southwest of New Orleans.

Shell, in partnership with BP and Chevron, is building and deploying a
huge  oil  drilling  platform,  known  as  “Perdido,”  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,
which  was  originally  set  for  production  in  2010.  Perdido  is  expected  to
yield more than 100,000 bbl/d of crude. The rig is nearly as tall as the Eiffel
Tower, and is secured to the seabed by moorings spanning an area the size
of downtown Houston—an enormous investment.27

It is located in deep water 8 miles north of a maritime boundary defined
by  a  Jimmy  Carter–era  treaty  dividing  the  gulf  for  purposes  of  resource
development  by  the  US,  Mexico,  and  Cuba.  While  the  Shell  partnership
believes the oil to be pooled on the US side, Mexico claims that Perdido
will siphon oil from its side. And although Mexico would like to join the
group,  its  state-owned  oil  company,  Pemex,  is  forbidden  by  law  from
participating with foreign partners in developing its crude.

Ironically,  while  our  oil  companies  are  prohibited  from  drilling  next  to
the US, we drill close to Mexico and turn a blind eye when other nations

drill  next  to  us.  Cuba’s  state-run  company,  Cubapetroleo,  has  forged  an
agreement with China’s Sinopec to explore for oil on its half of the Florida
Strait  using  Chinese  equipment  and  operational  services.  The  USGS
estimates that the North Cuban Basin contains about 4.6 billion barrels of
oil.28

American  oil  companies  are  being  forced 

to  make  spectacular
investments to go farther and deeper offshore because of off-limit drilling
restrictions  in  more  accessible  coastal  reserves.  At  the  same  time,  some
congressional  leaders  continue  to  blame  the  companies,  rather  than  their
own actions, for escalating gasoline prices.

Deepwater Horizon: An Unwasted Crisis

 

Did the Deepwater Horizon disaster provide a rallying event to assert
stranglehold  control  over  drilling  by  opposing  environmental  bureaucrats
and lobbies? Let’s review some developments.

Following the event, Interior Secretary Ken Salazar convened a group of
seven experts identified by the National Academy of Engineers to prepare a
situation assessment with recommendations. The panel later protested that
Salazar  altered  their  report  after  it  was  signed,  misrepresenting  two  key
recommendations:29

•    The  original  report  called  for  a  “temporary  pause  in  all  current
drilling  operations  for  a  sufficient  length  of  time”  to  perform
additional  safety  tests  for  the  thirty-three  exploratory  deepwater
wells  already  working  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  whereas  the  altered
version urged “an immediate halt to drilling operations on the thirty-
three permitted wells, not including the relief wells currently being
drilled by BP, that are currently being drilled using floating rigs in
the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  Drilling  operations  should  cease  as  soon  as
safely practicable for a 6-month period.”

•  The version the experts signed recommended a 6-month moratorium
on  permits  for  new  exploratory  wells  in  water  deeper  than  1,000
feet.  The  altered  version  recommended  a  6-month  moratorium  on
“new wells being drilled using floating rigs.” This included rigs in
water deeper than 500 feet, covering more of them.

President  Obama 

Objecting  to  the  revisions,  the  panelists  argued  that  the  6-month
moratorium on deepwater drilling would make operations less safe, sending
technical experts to foreign locations along with the rigs that will relocate.
then  appointed  a  seven-person  commission 

to
determine  what  caused  the  oil  spill  and  to  take  steps  to  make  offshore
drilling  safer.  Unlike  the  technically  distinguished  presidential  Rogers
Commission  convened  to  investigate  the  NASA  space  shuttle  Challenger
tragedy, 
the  offshore  drilling  commission  had  no  appointees  with
appropriate engineering or petroleum industry backgrounds. In fact, most of
them don’t favor drilling at all.30

•  Commission cochair Senator Bob Graham (D-FL)has fought drilling

off the Florida coast throughout his career.

•    Cochair  William  Reilly  headed  the  EPA  under  President  George
H.W.Bush, but is best known as a former president and chairman of
the  World  Wildlife  Fund,  one  of  the  largest  and  most  aggressive
environmental lobbies.

•    Member  Donald  Boesch,  a  University  of  Maryland  biological
oceanographer and strong opponent of drilling off the Virginia coast,
has previously argued that “the impacts of the oil and gas extraction
industry . . . on the Gulf Coast wetlands represent an environmental
catastrophe of massive and underappreciated proportions.”

•  Member Terry Garcia, an executive vice president of the National
Geographic  Society,  directed  coastal  programs  during  the  Clinton-
Gore  administration  with  particular  emphasis  on  “recovery  of
endangered species, habitat conservation planning, and Clean Water
Act implementation.”

•    Member  Fran  Ulmer,  chancellor  of  the  University  of  Alaska–
Anchorage,is  also  a  member  of  both 
the  Aspen  Institute’s
Commission on Arctic Climate Change and the Union of Concerned
Scientists  board,  which  opposes  nuclear  power  and  more  offshore
drilling,  favoring  government  policies  “that  reduce  vehicle  miles
traveled” (i.e., driving cars).

•    Member  Frances  Beinecke,  president  of  the  Natural  Resources
Defense Council, has called for bans on offshore and Arctic drilling
on at least five occasions since the Deepwater Horizon accident. She
has stated, “We can blame BP for the disaster, and we should. We

can  blame  lack  of  government  oversight  for  the  disaster,  and  we
should.  But  in  the  end,  we  must  place  blame  where  it  originated:
Americans’ addiction to oil.”

•    Harvard’s  Cherry  A.  Murray  has  a  professional  background  in
physics  and  optics,  not  petroleum  engineering,  modern  drilling
techniques,  or  rig  safety,  although  she  has  served  as  dean  of  the
Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences.

Federal  US  District  Court  Judge  Martin  L.  C.  Feldman  temporarily
overturned  the  Obama-Biden  administration’s  6-month  moratorium  on
deepwater  drilling  on  June  22,  2010.  His  twenty-two-page  ruling  in
response to a lawsuit filed by Horn-beck Offshore Services, LLC, made it
clear that even presidents aren’t empowered to impose an “edict” that isn’t
justified  by  science  or  safety.  Feldman’s  findings  expressed  “uneasiness”
over the administration’s claim that its safety report, which recommended
the  ban,  had  been  “peer  reviewed”  by  experts,  because  they  had  since
publicly  disavowed  the  ban.  The  opinion  found  “no  evidence”  that  Mr.
Salazar  “balanced  the  concern  for  environmental  safety”  with  existing
policy and “no suggestion” that he considered any alternatives. The judge
listed  environmental  groups  that  had  joined  the  administration’s  defense
against  the  suit.  One  was  the  NRDC,  headed  by  drilling  commission
member Frances Beinecke.31

Ken  Salazar  promptly  responded  to  Judge  Feldman’s  ruling  with  a
revised  ban  and  a  federal  legal  challenge.  This  time,  instead  of  banning
drilling  deeper  than  500  feet,  he  banned  all  drilling  by  floating  rigs  (the
only equipment that drills in deep water). He also set a firmer November
30th moratorium deadline.

Twenty-two of this country’s total thirty-three deepwater rigs are located
near already-economically ravaged Louisiana. Pending lease sales have also
been  canceled  off  the  Virginia  and  western  Gulf  of  Mexico  coasts,  along
with  a  drilling  program  in  Alaska’s  Chukchi  and  Beaufort  seas  that  had
been  scheduled  to  begin  in  June  2010.  While  of  more  than  50,000  US
offshore  wells  the  Deepwater  Horizon  represents  the  first  significant
accident,  the  ultimate  future  of  offshore  drilling  will  inevitably  be
influenced  by  the  political  party  dominance  results  of  the  2010  and  2012
national elections.

The  International  Association  of  Drilling  Contractors  estimates  that
moratorium  delays  costs  as  much  as  $330  million  per  month  in  direct
wages, not counting lost businesses for servicing the rigs.32

According to the Louisiana Mid-Continent Oil & Gas Association, each
idled deepwater rig can eradicate 1,420 jobs, with salaries averaging $1,804
per week. In the meantime, many of the rig owners are likely to relocate
their platforms to more politically reliable foreign regions, including Brazil,
China, and the North Sea sites. Some may never return. Diamond Offshore
has announced plans to relocate one of its rigs to Egypt and another to the
Republic of the Congo. Scotland’s Stena Drilling is shifting one to Canada.33
Many  of  the  deepwater  rigs  idled  by  the  moratorium  are  likely  to  be
acquired  by  Petrobras  for  Brazil’s  offshore  fields.  The  company  plans  to
drill  at  depths  up  to  14,000  feet.  In  August  2009,  the  US  Export-Import
Bank  issued  a  “preliminary  commitment”  to  loan  Petrobras  $2  billion.
George  Soros  will  benefit  from  his  $900  million  investment  in  the  oil
giant.33

2

It  might  be  noted  that  in  June  2010,  that  very  same  US  Export-Import
Bank (Ex-Im, for short) denied loan guarantees to Reliance Power Ltd., an
Indian utility that is building a coal-fired plant near Sasan, India. The deal
would  have  enabled  Bucyrus  International  Inc.,  based  in  Milwaukee,
Wisconsin,  to  export  about  $600  million  in  mining  equipment  over  three
years.  Although  the  Reliance-Bucyrus  project  met  all  Ex-Im  qualifying
criteria,  including  tougher  CO
  standards  imposed  by  the  Obama  White
House,  the  bank  caved  under  pressure  from  the  Treasury  and  State
departments. Obama-appointed Ex-Im chairman Fred Hochberg explained,
“President  Obama  has  made  clear  his  administration’s  commitment  to
transition away from high-carbon investments and toward a cleaner-energy
future.”34

A  May  2010  NBC  News/Wall  Street  Journal  poll  revealed  that  overall
public  support  for  offshore  drilling  remained  strong,  even  while  BP’s
damaged well continued to gush huge amounts of crude into coastal areas.
Six out of every ten respondents replied that they backed more drilling off
the  US  coast  (34  percent  “strongly  supported”  the  idea),  and  another  26
percent  agreed  “somewhat.”  More  than  half  (53  percent)  agreed  with  the
statement  “The  potential  benefits  to  the  economy  outweigh  the  potential
harm to the environment.” Gulf state respondents (63 percent) were most
inclined to support additional offshore drilling and rigs.35

A  legitimate  concern  cited  against  offshore  drilling  is  that  it  leaks  oil
pollutants  into  ocean  ecosystems,  even  under  safe  operational  conditions.
Yet  putting  this  issue  into  perspective,  a  recent  National  Academy  of
Sciences study estimates that of the 260,000 metric tons of oil seepage that
is thought to occur in waters off North America each year, about 63 percent
of  that  amount  escapes  naturally  from  formations  below  the  seafloor.
Activities associated with oil and gas exploration, on average, are estimated
to  be  about  3,000  metric  tons,  less  than  1  percent.  The  rest  comes  from
petroleum  tanker  transportation  and  releases  from  cars,  boats,  and  other
sources.36

ANWR: Turmoil in the Tundra

 

Particularly intesnse controversy exists over whether or not to lift a 30-
year  government  moratorium  that  prevents  drilling  in  the  Arctic  National
Wildlife  Refuge  area,  which  the  US  Department  of  Interior  estimates  to
contain  between  9  and  16  billion  barrels  of  recoverable  oil;  the  DOE
estimates this figure to be about 10.6 billion barrels (potentially producing
876,000  bbl/d).  John  Cogan,  an  industry  attorney  at  McDermott  Will  &
Emery in Houston, believes there may even be much more— possibly as
much  as  the  16  billion  barrels  suggested  by  the  Interior  Department—
because the DOE based its recovery estimate on outdated methods.

While  top  Alaskan  government  officials  strongly  favor  such  drilling,
environmental  lobbies  aggressively  oppose  it.  Alaska  has  had  little  luck
opening  up  restricted  federal  lands  (65  percent  of  the  state)  to  oil  and
natural gas development. Efforts to release ANWR for drilling have been
stymied for more than a decade.

On May 13, 2008, Senator Chuck Schumer (D-NY) rose on the Senate
floor to demand that arms sales to Saudi Arabia cease unless the kingdom
“increases its oil production by one million barrels per day.” Interestingly,
this  is  nearly  the  same  amount  that  might  be  flowing  from  ANWR  if
President Clinton hadn’t vetoed drilling there in 1995. Yet senator Schumer
doesn’t support drilling in ANWR, or anywhere else in the US.

Alaska’s then-governor Sarah Palin was and still is incensed that drilling
in ANWR is being prevented at a time when the state and nation are facing
energy  shortages  and  skyrocketing  economic  impacts:  “It’s  a  very

nonsensical position that we are in right now, as we send the president and
Secretary [of Energy Sam] Bod-man overseas to ask Saudis to ramp up the
production of oil so that hungry markets in America can be fed, when your
sister state in Alaska has those resources … But these lands are locked up
by Congress and we are not allowed to drill.”37

While  various  polls  show  that  the  majority  of  Alaskans  and  other
Americans still favor expanded drilling on government-controlled lands and
waters,  opponents  of  ANWR  drilling  are  particularly  vocal,  raising  the
specter  of  despoiling  a  vast  wilderness  and  wildlife.  In  reality,  the  actual
operations  would  be  confined  to  a  tiny  fraction  of  the  1.4-million-acre
reserve—namely, a 2,000-acre plot of land smaller than the footprint of the
Los Angeles LAX airport.

Alaska  has  other,  larger  oil  and  natural  gas  resources  that  could  begin
producing even faster than a drilling operation in ANWR. The Chukchi Sea
area has a large number of exploration bids for offshore development, and a
privately  funded,  new  $30  billion  natural  gas  pipeline  project  has  been
approved.  The  pipeline  will  be  the  largest  private  construction  project  in
North  American  history,  consisting  of  a  gas  treatment  plant  on  the  North
Slope  of  the  state  and  approximately  2,000  miles  of  pipe  connecting  to
Alberta, Canada. If required, an additional 1,500-mile-long extension will
deliver natural gas from Alberta to Chicago.

Alaska  has  a  strong  vested  interest  in  maintaining  a  pristine  natural
environment, because tourism is the state’s largest private-sector employer,
accounting  for  one  out  of  eight  jobs  and  growing.  Still  former  governor
Palin  doesn’t  buy  the  notion  that  ANWR  drilling  is  going  to  have  any
significant  impact  upon  the  region’s  wildlife:  “There  are  magnificent
caribou and wolves and bears and porcupines and birds all through Alaska.
You can see them thriving today as you could in the 1960s, before pipelines
were  built.  Talk  about  coexistence;  we’ve  got  grizzlies  roaming  on  the
pipelines and caribou migrations passing beneath them.”38

And  what  about  polar  bears?  The  governor  has  some  opinions  about
them,  too:  “We  have  been  coexisting  with  bears  for  decades  to  no
detrimental  effect;  our  bear  population  is  thriving  .  .  .  This  [Endangered
Species Act] listing is nothing but interference from outsiders who insist on
keeping Alaska from developing.”39

Trading Oil for Carbon

 

In  April  2010,  a  little  over  a  year  after  assuming  office,  President
Obama appeared in the press to have undergone a miraculous energy policy
conversion  by  announcing  that  “in  order  to  sustain  economic  growth  and
produce jobs, and keep our businesses competitive, we are going to need to
harness  traditional  sources  of  fuel.”  Accordingly,  he  proposed  a  plan  to
expand oil and natural gas exploration in the Atlantic, the eastern Gulf of
Mexico, and Alaska.

Did  this  apparent  departure  from  the  traditional  opposition  of  his  very
liberal  base  signal  a  “drill  baby  drill”  epiphany?  Was  it,  in  fact,  a  real
agenda  change  at  all,  or  was  it  possibly  just  a  cap-and-trade  bargaining
strategy? Let’s review some of the circumstances a bit more closely.

Public  anger  over  high  2008  gasoline  prices  prompted  the  Bush  White
House  and  Congress  to  lift  a  long-standing  ban  on  offshore  drilling  and
approve a 5-year plan to open a significant portion of the OCS, including a
lease to begin drilling off the Virginia coast that was to be bid out in 2011.
Interior  Secretary  Ken  Salazar  later  postponed  the  deal  until  2012.  An
assumption held by many is that this would provide more time for activist
environmental groups to fight implementation in courts.

A new moratorium was also placed upon those aspects of the Bush plan
that  would  have  allowed  leasing  along  the  North  Atlantic  and  Pacific
coasts.  Accordingly,  the  big  news  was  that  President  Obama  vowed  to
support development of leased areas off of Alaska’s North Slope, referring
to a $2.6 billion lease sale in the Chukchi Sea that had already been signed
in  2008.  He  also  proposed  to  “study”  drilling  along  the  South  Atlantic
coast.  (These  plans  are  now  on  hold  pending  his  oil  spill  commission’s
conclusions.)

Not  highlighted  was  the  president’s  plan  to  cancel  five  other  Alaskan
leases,  which  include  two  in  Chukchi,  a  location  with  an  estimated  77
billion gallons of oil.

The Obama-Biden administration would now allow drilling along a strip
in the eastern Gulf of Mexico, 125 miles off the coast of Florida, but there’s
a big catch: This will require congressional approval, and ten coastal state
Democrats  have  recently  declared  opposition  to  offshore  drilling.  Such
resistance can present a real obstacle.

Suspicions abound in some circles that President Obama’s proposal has
the  net  effect  of  leveraging  about  13  billion  barrels  of  oil  and  41  trillion
cubic feet of gas controlled by his administration and party through locked-
up  leases  as  a  trade  barter  for  Republican  support  of  his  Comprehensive
Energy and Climate Bill (aka, the newly proposed Power Bill, or cap-and-
trade). Speaking at a solar panel fabrication plant in Fremont, California, on
May 26, Obama used the strategically staged opportunity to say, “Climate
change poses a threat to our way of life. In fact we’re already beginning to
see its profound and costly impact . . . And the spill in the Gulf, which is
heartbreaking,  only  underscores  the  necessity  of  seeking  alternative  fuel
sources.”40

In a June 3, 2010, speech at Pittsburgh’s Carnegie Mellon University, the
president  further  stated,  “I  will  make  the  case  for  a  clean-energy  future
wherever I can, and I will work with anyone from either party to get this
done . . . The next generation will not be held hostage to energy sources
from the last century.”

Again,  on  June  15,  the  president  devoted  a  major  portion  of  an  Oval
Office  speech  regarding  the  spill  to  pitch  comprehensive  energy  reform
legislation as a means to end US dependence on fossil fuels and foreign oil
and to create a clean-energy future: “For decades we have known the days
of cheap and easily accessible oil were numbered . . . For decades, we have
failed to act with the sense of urgency this challenge requires . . . We cannot
consign our children to this future.”

As Daniel Weiss of the Center for American Progress observed, “The oil
disaster adds a new urgency and a new opportunity for connecting with the
public . . . The administration was going to do it anyway, but that gives it a
new way to talk about it.”41

But  successful  bargaining  with  coastal  state  Democratic  congressional
leaders  to  gain  Republican  support  for  energy/climate  legislation  now
appears  to  be  unlikely,  as  attacks  on  offshore  drilling  escalate  in  the
aftermath of the BP oil spill disaster off the Louisiana coast.

Recognizing  a  problem,  bill  cosponsors  senators  Kerry  and  Lieberman
have shifted legislation emphasis away from previous drilling advocacy. In
late 2009, Kerry had called for a bill that included “additional onshore and
offshore oil and gas exploration.” In May 2010, he confessed to Investor’s
Business Daily that changes had to be made to win votes in the wake of the
oil spill. Those changes include a provision that will let any coastal state

ban drilling otherwise permitted by a neighboring state within 75 miles of
its coastline if a mandatory study indicates that an accident could harm that
impacted state’s economy or environment.

Although  it  is  reported  that  Senator  Kerry  and  President  Obama  had
previously  discussed  drilling  leniency  to  woo  Republicans,  it  mostly  just
turned off Democrats. Accordingly, there was little or nothing to barter for
cap-and-trade provisions embodied in the proposed legislation. In any case,
that’s one trade that should be capped without question.42

Oil Prices: Politics and Prognoses

 

President Obama, along with some members of Congress, has declared
war on Big Oil. The proposed 2011 White House budget will kill $4 billion
in long-established accelerated depreciation allowances and other incentives
for oil and gas drilling. Senator Robert Menendez (D-NJ) has introduced a
bill  that  would  remove  another  $20  billion  in  industry  tax  breaks.  The
Independent Petroleum Association maintains that these tax increases will
fall  disproportionately  on  small  drilling  companies,  potentially  reducing
annual  oil  and  gas  production  by  20  to  40  percent.  This  despite  EIA
estimates  that  fossil  fuels  will  still  account  for  79  percent  of  US  energy
demand in 2030, regardless how many tax incentives are hurled at biofuels,
wind and solar. As a result, energy prices will soar, and vital investments
and supplies will dwindle.43

World  competition  for  oil  is  becoming  more  and  more  aggressive  as
developing  countries  such  as  China  and  India  continue  to  increase
consumption through industrial growth and economic prosperity. According
to  the  DOE’s  EIA,  global  demand  is  expected  to  increase  by  60  percent
over the next 2 decades, while demand in developing countries may grow
by  115  percent  during  this  period,  due  in  part  to  increasing  automobile
ownership.  The  US  currently  imports  about  70  percent  of  the  oil  it
consumes  (roughly  13  million  bbl/d),  and  these  imports  are  expected  to
increase to an estimated 17.7 million bbl/d within the next 2 decades.43

Today,  the  US  consumes  more  than  one-fourth  of  the  world’s  oil  and
crude  oil  imports,  amounting  to  about  $700  billion  each  year  and
constituting  about  a  quarter  of  the  nation’s  balance-of-trade  deficit.  More
than  two-thirds  of  this  consumption  is  in  the  transportation  sector,  where

energy  demands  are  growing  rapidly.  Continuously  increasing  crude  oil
prices with major impacts upon gasoline costs for consumers are likely to
impact driving habits and promote purchases of more efficient vehicles that
will moderate consumption rates, but total influences are highly conjectural.
Historic consumption levels have been driven by high per-capita ownership
of  automobiles, 
transportation
preferences,  and  relatively  low  gasoline  costs  compared  with  most  other
countries.  Still,  US  consumers,  on  average,  probably  spend  a  smaller
fraction of their incomes on gasoline now than in previous decades.

large  vehicles,  private  versus  public 

Important Democrat leaders appear to support the idea that high energy
prices  are  useful  to  drive  conservation  and  to  hasten  investment  in  a
transition  to  nonfossil  alternatives.  Speaking  as  a  then-senator  and  a
presidential candidate, Barack Obama stated that he had hoped the rise in
gas  prices  would  have  been  a  “gradual  adjustment”  (not  an  avoidable

According to Bureau of Transportation statistics, the US now has about
251  million  registered  motor  vehicles  (6.6  million  motorcycles  and  135
million passenger cars); more than 8,000 commercial aircraft and 224,000
general aviation aircraft; and 12.7 million recreational boats.44 Some argue
that supply shortages and high fuel prices are just the medicine our country
needs  to  curb  an  “addiction  to  oil”  through  forced  efficiencies  and
development of “sustainable alternatives.” That philosophy would be more
compelling  if  transitioning  to  those  actively  touted  nonfossil  alternatives
offered  any  real  potential  to  replace  oil  and  natural  gas  dependence.  But
they  don’t.  Biofuels  are  little  more  than  an  energy  breakeven  at  best:
Hydrogen  is  a  big  energy  loser,  and  wind,  solar,  and  geothermal  power
options have extremely limited growth prospects.

Here again, global warming alarmists, carbon-trading lobbies, alternative
energy  hypesters,  and  environmental  activist  groups  wield  powerful
influences  over  policies  that  will  determine  America’s  energy  future.
Arguments  that  short  oil  supplies  will  hasten  a  transition  to  biofuels  as  a
solution to transportation needs ignore the unreality of the alleged energy
benefits  those  biofuels  afford,  and  their  broader  economic  impacts  upon
energy, food, and business costs. These burdens will fall most heavily upon
the segments of the population that can least afford them. The result will be
more,  rather  than  less,  dependence  upon  unreliable  foreign  oil  supplies,
while  simultaneously  weakening  US  economic  capacity  to  invest  in  vital
new energy technology development.

adjustment)  so  that  Americans  could  adapt  to  the  reality  of  four-dollar
gasoline. That adjustment is pretty tough on independent truckers who must
pay  $1,500  to  fill  up  their  tanks  and  school  districts  that  are  forced  to
eliminate bus stops—and even entire routes.

Even  though  the  Democrat-controlled  Congress  passed  the  Energy
Independence Act of 2007, the party majority remains steadfastly opposed
to drilling in areas that contain enormous amounts of oil and natural gas. As
a result of large political uncertainties regarding future legislation, nervous
oil  markets  are  driving  pump  prices  even  higher.  Oil  futures  traders,
anticipating tightened supplies, are upping their bids, a condition that will
be  exacerbated  if  cap-and-trade  legislation  is  enacted.  Since  drilling
prohibitions  and  carbon  cap-and-trade  advocacy  tend  to  have  strongest
support  among  Democratic  Party  representatives, 
the  outcomes  of
upcoming  presidential  and  congressional  elections  will  continue  to  have
important  and  enduring  consequences  upon  domestic  oil  and  gas
development and expenses.

Speculators pay close attention to world markets. As China has increased
annual  petroleum  use  by  920  million  barrels  over  a  5-year  period,  the
institutional  investors  (or  “index  speculators”)  upped  their  demand  for
petroleum  futures  by  848  million  barrels  over  the  same  period.  Buying
sizable “long” positions, they have been betting that oil prices, regardless of
how  high  they  may  seem,  will  continue  to  rise.  Because  of  an  “Enron
loophole”  allowed  in  federal  trading  regulations,  the  investors  have  been
able to circumvent typical speculative limits. The resultant lopsided betting
has propelled prices upward.

After  2007,  when  crude  oil  prices  rocketed  to  about  $70  per  barrel,
lawmakers threatened to close the loophole by regulating electronic trading,
and  they  gave  the  Federal  Trade  Commission  more  authority  to  guard
against  market  manipulation.  Trading  experts  are  asking  that  special
attention be directed to pension funds, endowments, and other institutional
investors  who  have  been  big  players,  pouring  billions  of  dollars  into  a
variety of commodities—oil is but one of them—with dramatic price-hiking
results. Other notable examples are corn, soybeans, wheat, and rice.

But  demand-based  speculation  forces  aren’t  the  only  causes  of  the
nervous oil markets that drive up prices. Uncertainties about the steadiness
of  the  supply  sources  are  important  too;  consider  the  potential  political
turmoil in Nigeria or production problems in an unstable Mexico. As John

Felmy, chief economist for the American Petroleum Institute, has observed,
“If  oil  prices  really  were  so  much  higher  than  supply-and-demand  forces
would suggest, then holders of crude oil would be unable to find buyers,
and  inventories  would  build—but  that’s  not  happening.”  As  least,  not  so
long as China’s large needs and deep pockets continue to expand.45

We Shale Overcome?

 

What  if  there  was  a  domestic  source  of  oil  that  could  support  all  of
America’s needs for the next 400 years or so? Well, maybe there is. In that
case,  everyone  would  be  really  excited,  right?  No,  probably  not.  At  least
that’s the current situation.

On  July  22,  2008,  then-President  Bush  announced  that  he  wanted  to
remove  all  barriers  to  extracting  oil  from  enormous  shale  formations
located in a swath of federally owned land encompassing parts of Colorado,
Wyoming,  and  Utah.  This  followed  a  15–14  vote  by  the  Senate
Appropriations Committee that would have ended a 1-year moratorium on
enacting rules for oil shale development on federal lands. Senator Salazar, a
Democrat and leading opponent of oil shale development, had inserted the
moratorium  into  an  omnibus  spending  bill  in  December  2007.  He  then
successfully proposed the new May 2008 bill to extend it for another year.46
Extension  of  the  moratorium  was  a  big  setback  for  Royal  Dutch  Shell
and other oil companies that had already invested many, many millions of
dollars in shale oil development research since the passage of the Energy
Policy Act of 2005. That legislation established the original framework for
commercial leasing of federal oil shale lands, similar to provisions for on-
land and offshore drilling arrangements. Extension of the moratorium came
at a time when Senator Salazar and his fellow Democratic colleagues had
been  blasting  Big  Oil  for  not  reinvesting  enough  of  their  profits  in
developing  new  sources  of  oil,  when  in  2007  the  oil  shale  project
represented Shell’s largest R&D expenditure. And in addition to forbidding
the  DOI  from  leasing  federal  shale  lands,  Democratic  legislators  also
threatened to block imports of oil from Canadian tar sand reserves because
it was considered to be too environmentally “dirty.”

Just how big is that US oil shale reserve? It’s really, really big. Estimates
range from an equivalent of 800 billion barrels of crude up to possibly 2

trillion  barrels.  The  800  billion  estimate  equals  about  three  times  the
amount  of  all  Saudi  Arabia’s  oil—in  fact,  more  than  Saudi  Arabia,  Iran,
Russia,  Venezuela,  Iraq,  and  Mexico  oil  reserves  combined.  One  trillion
barrels  of  crude  equals  all  the  oil  the  world  has  used  since  it  was  first
discovered in Titusville, Pennsylvania, in 1859. When developed, the Green
River  Formation  would  provide  oil  shale  comparable  to  the  extent  of  the
energy  potential  of  Alberta’s  tar  sands  reserves.  Together,  the  US  and
Canada would have the world’s largest oil supply.47

Why hasn’t that huge resource been developed before now? The several

reasons warrant some discussion. The first is cost.

While oil from shale is similar to crude, it is much more complex and
expensive to extract, and it also requires quality upgrading prior to being
used  as  refinery  feedstock.  The  oil  is  contained  in  sedimentary  rock  that
contains solid bituminous materials, called “kerogen,” that are released as
petroleum-like liquids when heated. The kerogen was formed by a natural
process  that  also  created  crude,  but  under  conditions  with  less  heat  and
pressure. The shale contains enough oil to actually burn, and some countries
use it directly for fuel.

Oil  shale  has  seen  limited  development  worldwide  because  many
countries lack large amounts, and those that do tend to rely upon cheaper
crude.  These  circumstances  have  inhibited  technology  advancement,
although  Estonia,  China,  and  Brazil  have  quite  well-established  oil  shale
industries.  High  oil  prices  during  the  1970s  and  1980s  stimulated  US
interest and technology investment, which waned after those prices fell.

Old oil extraction practices that involved mining the shale and processing
it on the surface are now being replaced by in situ methods that leave the
shale rocks in place underground. Shell’s process places electric heaters in
deep vertical holes dug into the shale to gradually raise its temperature over
a  2-to-3-year  period.  At  about  600ºF–700ºF,  the  oil  separates  and  is
gathered in collection wells within the extraction zone.48

Shell’s  current  plan  uses  ground-freezing  technology  to  establish  an
underground barrier (a “freeze wall”) around the extraction zone perimeter,
using pumped refrigeration fluid to block groundwater from entering and to
keep hydrocarbons from  leaving.  This  remains  unproven  at  a  commercial
scale  but  is  regarded  by  the  DOE  to  be  promising.  These  processes  are
energy and water intensive, yet Shell believes that as fuel prices continue to
rise, shale oil processing will be competitive.

Water  use  in  the  Green  River  Formation  region  within  the  Colorado
River drainage basin is a major oil shale concern. Each barrel of oil will
require about 3 barrels of water. Senator Orrin Hatch (R-UT), a strong oil
shale proponent, compares this requirement with ethanol processing: “Let’s
compare  it  to  ethanol.  Corn  needs  about  1,000  barrels  of  water  for  the
energy equivalent of a barrel of oil. That’s a crazy amount of water, but it’s
worked out alright so far because corn is grown in rainy areas, for the most
part.  But  if  you  want  to  increase  the  amount  of  ethanol,  you’re  going  to
have to go to irrigation, and then there will be major water limits on how
much we can afford to grow.”49

Senator Hatch observed that even though water is a lot scarcer in western
Colorado than in Iowa, the oil companies would recycle much of the water
they  would  use.  And  in  regard  to  other  environmental  impacts,  he  said,
“Let’s talk about land use and wildlife habitat. One acre of corn produces
the  equivalent  of  5  to  7  barrels  of  oil.  One  acre  of  oil  shale  produces
100,000 to 1 million barrels … That’s 1 million barrels that we would not
be  importing  from  Russia  and  the  Middle  East.  People  are  going  to  go
berserk  when  they  find  out  that  all  along  the  way  we  had  the  capacity,
within our own borders, to alleviate our dependency in an environmentally
friendly way.”50

American Processing Picture: Crude, Unrefined

 

The  US  faces  a  dangerous  lack  of  adequate  oil  refinery  capacity.  The
last  facility  to  be  constructed  was  the  Ashland  Refinery,  near  Garyville,
Louisiana, completed in 1976. Fewer than half of the number of plants that
existed  in  1981  still  remain,  down  from  324  to  149.  Disruptions  of
production  due  to  maintenance,  accidents,  and  natural  disasters  at  one  or
more of the plants can create supply shortfalls and price hikes with regional
and national impacts.51

Although demand for refined products—transportation fuels in particular
— continues to rise steadily, refineries are high on the list of least-wanted
industries in many locales. In California, where ten plants representing 20
percent  of  that  state’s  refining  capacity  were  closed  between  1985  and
1995,  it  is  unlikely  that  more  will  be  built  due  to  concerns  about  smog,

2

truck traffic carrying hazardous materials, and potential leaks in the event of
earthquakes.

Despite a reduction in plant numbers, refinery capacity has managed to
keep  up  with  the  national  demand  so  far  through  expansion  of  existing
facilities. This has also been less expensive than building new plants due to
stringent  environmental  restrictions.  Now,  even  that  approach  to  bring
capacities more in line with growing demands is being challenged.

The NRDC asked a federal judge to stop a $3.8-billion expansion of a
Whiting, Indiana, refinery owned by BP because it will discharge more CO
than  it  has  been  approved  for.  The  NRDC  has  been  actively  working  to
block  virtually  all  attempts  to  create  more  energy  from  fossils,  using  the
Clean  Air  Act  as  a  weapon.  Another  example  is  a  proposed  refinery  in
Arizona that has now been blocked for more than 10 years.

The National Center for Policy Analysis estimates that nearly 25 percent
of all capital investment that went into refineries during the 1990s was used
to  comply  with  environmental  regulations.  Between  1992  and  2001  this
amounted  to  more  than  $100  billion  in  costs  to  bring  refineries  into
compliance with environmental rules.

As  with  restrictions  on  drilling,  regulatory  constraints  on  refinery
development  and  expansion  will  predictably 
increase  our  energy
dependence upon foreign sources. Huge plants now under construction in
India,  Asia,  and  the  Middle  East,  which  will  produce  tanker  loads  of
gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel, will most likely meet the demand for refined
oil  products  in  the  US  and  other  countries.  By  2012,  India’s  refining
capacity  is  projected  to  double  to  about  4.8  million  bbl/d  through  $70
billion  in  investment.  And  they  won’t  be  worrying  about  CO
  emission
lawsuits.

2

The Political Environment: Time for a Climate Change

 

Unless and until better options are available, there is no alternative but
to  develop  and  optimize  real  resource  possibilities.  This  must  involve
exploring and developing untapped domestic fossil-fuel reserves; improving
and  applying  clean  coal  and  coal-to-liquid  fuel  technologies;  exploiting
opportunities  to  benefit  from  vast  US  oil  shale  deposits;  upgrading  and

expanding  refinery  infrastructures;  and  becoming  a  world  leader  in  the
development and beneficiary of safe nuclear power opportunities.

These priorities do not in any way preclude the importance of developing
solar power, geothermal power, and hydropower for electricity, or biofuels
for  automotive  applications.  And  they  are  certainly  no  substitute  for
essential conservation practices that will stretch all energy resources. Yes,
of course, energy conservation is essential, but it is quite a different matter
to  think  that  we  can  conserve  our  way  to  future  prosperity  without  also
expanding  the  supply  side.  Energy  fuels  the  economic  and  technological
progress  needed  to  advance  conservation  goals  we  all  share.  These
economies are essential to lower our energy consumption rates, our living
costs, and the impacts on our environment.

America  is  blessed  with  a  great  abundance  of  resources.  Key  among
these are the advantages afforded by a free market system and a proactive,
entrepreneurial spirit that enables innovation to flourish. These time-proven
strengths  are  now  under  assault.  The  radical  environmentalism  that  grew
out  of  movements  during  the  1960s  gained  new  purpose  and  traction
through  apocalyptic  climate  visions  in  the  late  1980s,  and  it  has  grown
exponentially  since.  As  a  result,  obstructionist  groups  have  increasingly
gained license to shut down vital energy initiatives that are recognized and
supported by the general public.52

2

Chief  villains  on  the  environmental  opposition  “hit”  parade,  listed  in
order of both vitriolic reaction and the amount we depend upon them for
total  US  electricity,  are  coal,  nuclear,  and  hydropower.  Coal  is  also  the
primary  target  that  carbon  cap-and-trade  promoters  have  in  their  sights.
Global  warming  GHG  hysteria  has  been  fixated  upon  coal-burning  CO
emissions  as  “pollution”  that  threatens  the  natural  world,  whereas  nature
regards CO
 as a fundamental part of all carbon-based life. The real fossil
combustion pollutants, sulfur and various particulates, can be more readily
removed, while CO
 sequestration is more costly—and also nonsensical—
particularly if the Earth continues to cool as scheduled.53

If Americans are concerned about costly energy now, they should realize
that  we  haven’t  seen  anything  yet.  Strategies  to  address  these  problems
through shortage-forced conservation measures and CO
 footprint–reducing
miracle cures aren’t going to be popular for very long. Such approaches will
simply  be  unsustainable,  along  with  the  alternatives  that  have  captured
media prominence.

2

2

2

Another sobering reality is that energy production will probably never be
entirely risk free. For example, there is no guarantee that, rare as they are,
future oil spills won’t occur. If we don’t drill at home, more oil is certain to
arrive by tankers and barges, with even greater accidental spillage threats
nearer  to  our  shores.  Meanwhile,  other  countries  less  careful  than  we  are
will continue to exploit oil and gas resources in nearby waters. Such risks
are  very  real  and  serious,  and  the  costs  of  doing  business  must  include
ample allowances for prevention and cleanup. Those responsibilities come
along with the benefits of the diverse energy resources we most fortunately
enjoy.

Chapter 11

DEMANDING TRUTH AND ACCOUNTABILITY

Climate  models  reveal  dramatic  warming 

Industrial Revolution.

trends  since 

the

We  have  been  grossly  deceived  regarding  purported  scientific
evidence of a man-made climate crisis. Anyone who claims to know what
climate changes will occur a year, a decade, or even longer ahead is either a
fraud  or  a  fool.  Speculations  are  a  different  matter,  and  variant  theories
abound.  That’s  what  moves  science  forward  and  helps  keep  it  honest
through authentic discourse and objective examination.

2

The corruption of science that was publicly exposed through the release
of purloined CRU e-mails came as no surprise to many who have witnessed
these  travesties  or  dared  to  challenge  the  claims.  Timothy  Ball,  a  former
climatology professor at the University of Winnipeg, received death threats
for presenting his beliefs. As he puts it, “CO
 was never a problem, and all
the machinations and deceptions exposed by these files prove that it was the
greatest deception in history, but nobody is laughing.” He adds that he has
“watched  climate  science  hijacked  and  corrupted  by  this  small  group  of
scientists … Surely this is the death knell for the CRU, the IPCC, Kyoto
and Copenhagen, and the carbon credits shell game.”1

Has  the  importance  of  the  CRU  scandal  been  overblown?  This  isn’t
simply  a  matter  involving  a  few  random  researchers  who  lost  their
professional compasses and made some inconsequential mistakes. Rather, it
involves several of the most influential representatives of a climate science
community that has received more than $30 billion from US taxpayers over
the past 20 years … and one that guides many trillions of dollars in policy
decisions. These are key people who have

•  controlled central processes and findings of the UN’s IPCC climate

science reviews and leading publications in that field;

•  issued alarming predictions that have dominated world headlines;
•    mobilized  and  presided  over  international  climate  change  crisis

summits attended by thousands upon thousands of delegates;

•    provided  the  rationale  for  draconian  environmental  and  energy
regulations  that  significantly  impact  local,  regional,  national,  and
global economies;

•  dictated moral imperatives to justify massive transfers of wealth and
power  between  population  segments  and  nations,  and  between
citizens and their governments;
  established  the  basis  for  government  agencies  rather  than
competitive  free  market  processes  to  pick  energy  and  technology
winners and losers; and

•  afforded a good cover story for blatant and unproductive cap-and-

• 

trade profiteering.

Is  this  all  connected  to  a  diabolical,  centrally  organized  conspiracy?
Probably not. More likely, it reflects a confluence of separate agendas that

are  well  served  by,  if  not  totally  dependent  upon,  a  man-made  global
warming premise in general and demonization of carbon in particular. The
vast  majority  of  the  proponents  should  be  assumed  to  be  very  good,
honorable, and sincere people who believe in their causes and the scientific
claims  that  support  them.  The  same  goes  for  competent  and  dedicated
scientists on all sides of climate debates who are deserving of public trust
and support.

Silent Hearings in the Senate

 

Senator Inhofe, an outspoken critic of global warming disaster theories,
has  worked  very  hard  to  bring  solid  science  into  the  debate.  As  ranking
member of the Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works, he has
convened  hearings  to  question  authorities  on  the  matter  with  scant  media
interest. This number of “skeptics” now exceeds six hundred fifty, including
Japanese  chemist  Kiminori  Itoh,  who  calls  global  warming  alarmism  the
“worst  scientific  scandal.”  Dr.  Itoh  is  one  of  many  who  formerly  worked
with IPCC and have since come to oppose the UN’s positions. His group is
growing rapidly, far outnumbering the fifty-two UN scientists who authored
IPCC’s 2007 AR-4 “Summary for Policymakers” report.2

Senator Inhofe is demanding an investigation of scientific improprieties
revealed in the CRU e-mails, calling the affair a wake-up call for America.
“The  notion  that  these  scientists  tried  to  declare  the  science  settled  for
personal  reasons  is  disgraceful,”  says  Inhofe.  “They  were  purposefully
misrepresenting  the  facts.  They  tried  to  make  America  believe,  and  it
worked, for a time. Even my grandkids came home filled with this stuff,
saying that ‘anthropogenic gases cause global warming’! I reminded them
that  these  things  go  in  cycles.  We’ve  had  warming,  then  cooling,  then
warming and cooling again. I’m delighted that people are discovering that
the science has been cooked for a long period of time.”3

Senator  Inhofe  noted  that  the  CRU  data  used  in  the  IPCC’s  2007
summary was subsequently used by the EPA in preparing its guidelines on
carbon  emissions,  connections  that  are  very  worrisome  for  the  American
taxpayer: “There are tremendous economic ramifications to what these guys
were trying to do … The IPCC for years has been costing the government

so much money, and now, wasted time in trying to pass faulty legislation
based on bad data.”4

Hans  von  Storch,  the  former  editor  of  Climate  Research,  said  on
November 23, 2009, that the behavior outlined in the hacked CRU e-mails
went too far, and that the East Anglia researchers “violated a fundamental
principle of science” (by refusing to share data): “They built a group to do
gate-keeping, which is totally unacceptable.” Von Storch is now a professor
at the University of Hamburg’s Meteorological Institute.5 Lord Monckton,
at  Britain’s  Science  and  Public  Policy  Institute,  went  even  farther  in  his
condemnation, saying that these researchers “are not merely bad scientists
—they  are  crooks.  And  crooks  who  have  perpetrated  their  crimes  at  the
expense of British and US taxpayers.”6

Unsustainable Energy Claims

 

Arguably  the  most  serious  public  deception  perpetrated  by  the  war
against climate change is the notion that cleaner, sustainable energy options
are available in sufficient abundance to replace dependence upon dwindling
fossils that currently provide about 85 percent of all US energy. Regrettably,
this is broadly recognized not to be the case at all, and this circumstance,
not global warming, presents epic challenges. Ironically, many of the same
groups  that  champion  environmental  and  human  causes  are  inhibiting
progress toward vital solutions.

Perhaps  the  least  publicly  understood  aspect  of  various  carbon-free
“sustainable” energy alternatives such as wind, solar, and geothermal power
are  their  anemic  capacities  to  contribute  in  significant  ways  to  achieving
higher levels of independence from foreign sources as world demands and
prices continue to escalate. Pervasive green advertising, which suggests that
sustainable fuel and power are virtually unlimited, is extremely misleading
in this regard and does the public great disservice. Such pretense obfuscates
the importance of exploring and exploiting untapped fossil fields, including
oil  shale  deposits;  strengthening  production  infrastructures;  and  greatly
expanding nuclear potentials that have no near-term substitutes at any costs.
Even as those other alternatives become more market competitive by virtue
of technology and processing economies, government incentives, and rising

oil prices, the prospects for real growth or environmental benefits fall far
short of popular illusions.

There is much we can learn from European experiences. The EU, which
like  the  US  relies  heavily  upon  fossils  and  imported  oil,  has  found  little
salvation through its enormous investments in renewable alternatives. This
realization  is  now  causing  pain  accompanied  by  second  thoughts  as
members  witness  their  economies  threatened  by  rampant  fuel  hikes  and
menacing  power  shortages.  A  contributing  factor  can  be  attributed  to  an
emphasis upon unsuccessful CO
 emission–reduction efforts that have also
failed to fill large energy gaps. As a result, the European Commission has
concluded that nuclear power offers the only clean-energy solution that can
avert a rapidly approaching crisis. This, despite the commission’s own polls
indicating that although France, the UK, the Czech Republic, Poland, and a
handful  of  other  European  states  are  strongly  pro-nuclear,  only  about  20
percent of Europe’s total citizenry support its use since Chernobyl.7

2

Yet even formerly antinuclear Italy now plans to begin building nuclear
plants within 5 years. The Italians seem to have become weary of paying
the highest electricity prices in Europe.

Massive European subsidies for expensive wind, solar, and hydropower
projects have delivered poor investment/return ratios, and the food-versus-
fuel  debate  has  deflated  the  biofuels  bubble.  Loud  public  protests  have
influenced  the  Scottish  Parliament  to  deny  permission  to  develop  a  huge
Isle of Lewis wind farm, and other proposals have drawn similar opposition
because of the large land tracts required. Offshore wind farms have proven
to be extremely costly to build and maintain. Still, other than nuclear power,
the EU regards wind to be its most viable nonfossil alternative hope.

Europe, like America, sits upon vast quantities of coal that are becoming
appreciated more and more. Yet Germany’s recently announced plans for a
new generation of coal-fired power plants have hit a wall of environmental
resistance over carbon emissions that have already caused some proposals
to be canceled. This has built a stronger case for more nuclear development
in Germany, reversing previous intentions to phase nuclear out. France and
Britain have hatched a joint plan to construct a new generation of nuclear
power stations and export technology around the world, yet EU leadership
remains  bogged  down  in  trying  to  win  a  public  debate  over  its  energy
future.  As  Czech  prime  minister  Mirek  Topolanek  recently  warned,  “We

must  do  more  than  talk  about  nuclear  energy.  It  is  really  five  minutes  to
midnight.”8

The energy security alarm clock is ticking for America, too, and nuclear
development  is  an  inevitable  priority.  Vital  aspects  of  long-overdue
infrastructure expansion are necessary in order to (1) reassert technological
science and plant construction; (2) ensure leadership; (3) establish an active
spent fuel reprocessing program; and (4) provide safe, effective storage for
radioactive waste products.

The Energy Independence Myth

 

2

2

2

Political  slogans  that  offer  visions  of  an  energy-independent  America
powered and fueled by abundant sunshine, wind, and corn aren’t likely to
come to fruition.

Never mind that CO

 reduction efforts applying alternative energy in EU
countries have accomplished nothing, and that the level of CO
 emissions
between  the  years  2000  and  2004  grew  2.1  percent,  compared  with  1.3
percent for the US. Forget that global temperatures haven’t risen since 1998
despite higher CO
 emissions worldwide; that the 2008 Antarctic summer
ice melt was the smallest on record; and that cooling is expected to continue
at least through 2015. But don’t forget that hot or cold, flood or drought,
energy, not climate, is a global problem that won’t go away.9

The  terms  “energy  independence”  and  “energy  security”  should  be
recognized to mean very different things. Energy independence is an empty
but appealing political slogan. It offers a fantasy illusion of an autonomous
America,  powered  and  fueled  by  limitless  sunjuice,  friendly  breezes,  and
amber waves of grain that sever our reliance upon dirty smokestacks and
greedy  tyrants,  both  foreign  and  domestic.  Forget  it!  It’s  not  going  to
happen.

Energy  security,  however,  is  an  urgent  goal  that  should  be  taken  very
seriously. That goal is to secure sustainable supplies of energy to ensure an
uninterrupted  high  quality  of  life  for  the  citizens  of  this  country,  and  to
advance continuing social and economic progress for generations to come
as members of a larger world community. This does not imply subscribing
to  a  “new  world  order”  or  abandoning  independent  national  interests.  It

does imply that we must realize that globalized markets, including energy,
are an unavoidable reality and an indispensable necessity.10

America’s  future  prosperity  will  hinge  upon  its  ability  to  produce  and
exchange value in an oil-fueled world market, which includes countries that
don’t like us. Oil is the new currency that defines bargaining power, both
for those who provide it and for those who can afford the price. The quest
for that currency is producing some very disturbing alliances among large
emerging consumer nations and unsavory adversarial regimes. They draw
upon huge national budgets, share technologies and operational costs, and
function with environmental impunity in our coastal waters.11

Oil-hungry  China  has  been  putting  together  oil  and  gas  deals  with
Argentina,  Brazil,  Cuba,  Peru,  Ecuador,  and  most  troubling,  Venezuela—
the  fourth-largest  US  oil  supplier.  A  series  of  agreements  will  enable
Chinese companies to explore for new resources and set up refineries in that
South  American  country,  which  currently  is  headed  by  an  anti-American
dictator. A similar circumstance is developing in Cuban waters in the Gulf
of  Mexico  near  Florida.  China’s  continued  penetration  into  the  Western
Hemisphere, including ambitious efforts to secure agreements with Canada,
will  have  profound  economic  and  political  implications  for  America’s
future energy security.

India’s booming economy, which has been growing at a remarkable rate
of  8  percent  per  year  throughout  the  past  decade,  is  driving  escalating
competition  with  other  countries  for  oil  imports.  Presently,  70  percent  of
India’s  energy  needs  are  supplied  by  domestic  coal  reserves  and  only  30
percent by oil, 70 percent of which is imported. At current growth rates, the
IEA predicts that India will continue to increase energy consumption by at
least 3.6 percent annually, causing it to double by 2025 when the nation will
import more than 90 percent of its petroleum supply.12

Looking  to  the  West,  India  is  working  to  pursue  relationships  with
Venezuela,  which  the  Indian  petroleum  minister  has  referred  to  as  “our
arrowhead  in  Latin  America”  that  can  be  used  to  open  up  other  South
American markets. Closer relationships between India and Venezuela will
run  counter  to  US  attempts  to  isolate  the  regime  of  Hugo  Chavez.
Venezuela,  the  fifth-largest  exporter  of  oil  worldwide,  is  seeking  to
diversify  its  markets  in  order  to  reduce  dependence  upon  the  US,  which
buys more than 60 percent of its crude.

Russia’s economy, like that of China and India, has been growing at an
amazing rate. In 2007, its real GDP rose by more than 8 percent, surpassing
the  growth  rates  in  all  other  G8  countries  and  marking  the  seventh
consecutive  year  of  economic  expansion.  Most  of  that  growth  has  been
driven by energy exports due to aggressive oil production and high world
oil  prices.  The  country  has  been  meeting  more  than  half  of  its  domestic
energy needs from enormous natural gas reserves, while energy consumed
from oil has actually decreased from 27 percent in 1992 to about 19 percent
currently. According to IMF and World Bank estimates, Russia’s oil and gas
sector generated more than 60 percent of its export revenues in 2007.13

Russia is actively pursuing cooperative energy deals with other countries,
including  China,  Cuba,  and  Venezuela.  In  2008,  the  Kremlin  dispatched
Deputy  Prime  Minister  Igor  Sechin  to  negotiate  a  bilateral  China-Russia
agreement  involving  crude  oil  trade,  joint  development  of  new  deposits,
construction  of  oil  and  gas  pipelines,  and  development  of  refining  and
chemical  production  facilities.  Both  countries  have  agreed  to  build  an
Eastern  Siberia–Pacific  oil  pipeline  to  China,  along  with  a  $10  billion
pipeline to transport natural gas to China from eastern and western regions
of Siberia.14

Energy Minister Sergey Shmatko announced in August 2008 that Russian
to  develop
oil  companies  have  “sufficiently  promising  prospects” 
cooperation  with  Cuban  partners  for  joint  oil  prospecting  in  the  Gulf  of
Mexico. He further commented, “I think that working groups will soon be
set up as part of an agreement signed by the Russian Energy Ministry and
the Cuban Ministry of Basic Industry at the commission session to examine
the  issue.”  Russia  may  provide  assistance  in  overhauling  Cuba’s  oil
production  infrastructure,  sharing  oil  transportation  technologies,  helping
repair Cuba’s crude oil storage facilities, and inspecting pipelines.15

Shmatko  further  indicated  that  the  Venezuelan  state-owned  petroleum
company Petróleos de Venezuela will also be involved in Russo-Cuban oil
processing  cooperation,  seeing  as  Venezuela  is  Cuba’s  strategic  partner.
Given  China’s  and  India’s  interest  too,  it  looks  as  though  the  Gulf  of
Mexico off America’s coast is going to be a very popular place for drilling
—with everyone except US Congress Democrats.

As other countries continue to exploit readily accessible oil and natural
gas  reservoirs,  including  some  in  North  America’s  coastal  waters,  US
companies  are  being  constrained  by  regulations  that  preclude  similar

opportunities.  Accordingly,  costs  associated  with  finding  and  developing
US  resources  are  rising  sharply;  they  nearly  doubled  between  2004  and
2006.  These  high  costs  are  motivating  American  companies  to  limit
capacities 
to
approaches used in manufacturing, power generation, and consumer goods.
This  involves  cutting  back  on  operations  of  oil  wells  and  platforms  that
aren’t essential to meet immediate demands in order to avoid unnecessary
expenses.16

through  a  “just-in-time”  production  strategy  similar 

If  the  US  really  wants  to  make  progress  toward  energy  independence,
why not begin by opening up offshore access to domestic supplies before
state-owned  national  companies  controlled  by  Cuba,  China,  and  Mexico
siphon off the shared reservoirs?

cap-and-trade 

carbon-emission 

It is safe to bet that days of cheap oil are over without requiring any help
from added government fuel taxes, price-hiking alternative fuel incentives,
and 
shenanigans.  Growing  global
competition for dwindling supplies will guarantee that happens. Continued
federal restrictions upon domestic drilling will also maintain petroleum and
natural gas prices at high levels for American consumers relative to world
levels, placing US exploration companies at even greater cost disadvantages
when  up  against  large  state-owned  operations.  Consequently,  we  will  be
forced to increase imports, becoming more, not less, dependent on foreign
sources. Some, such as China, Cuba, and Mexico, may be willing to sell us
some of what they obtain from our own offshore Gulf Coast regions as US
companies experience continued depletion of their legacy fields.17

California Dreaming: A Wake-Up Call

 

In December 2009, Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger (R-CA) released
a report based upon a California Energy Commission study predicting that
global  warming  would  cause  San  Francisco  Bay  waters  to  cover
Fisherman’s Wharf and Treasure Island by 2100. This somber forecast adds
to a sea of rising debt the entire state is already experiencing in part due to
its recent GHG emissions legislation.

A law passed by the governor and legislative Democrats in 2006 (AB32)
mandates that GHGs be reduced to 1990 levels (about 25 percent) by 2020.
While  the  state  continues  to  lose  industries,  jobs,  and  people,  its  top

executive hasn’t relented, stating, “We must be prepared if climate change
continues to worsen.”18

A 2009 study undertaken by economists at California State University at
Sacramento estimated that AB32 implementation costs “could easily exceed
$100 billion” and that the program would raise the cost of living by $7,857
per household annually by 2020. The California Small Business Roundtable
commissioned the research.

While California focuses upon windmills, solar panels, and electric cars,
vast offshore oil resources go undeveloped and nuclear power is ignored.
Consequently, the energy-starved state’s economic future is bleak. A 2009
Milken Institute study shows a recent loss of nearly four hundred thousand
manufacturing  jobs.  Other,  well-intentioned  environmental  policies  have
caused more than 450,000 acres of previously fertile agriculture land in the

Opponents  of  AB32  have  submitted  eight  hundred  thousand  signatures
(nearly  double  the  number  needed),  seeking  to  suspend  the  law  in  a
November  2010  ballot.  If  approved,  AB32  would  not  be  reinstated  until
California has four consecutive quarters when the unemployment rate is 5.5
percent or less.

Among  noted  critics  of  the  AB32  suspension  initiative  is  a  small
company  called  Serious  Materials,  a  California  building  materials
manufacturer and the only window producer to receive tax credits through
the  Obama-Biden  administration’s  “cash  for  caulkers”  stimulus  package.
Perhaps coincidentally, the company’s director is married to Cathy Zoi, the
administration’s  assistant  secretary  of  energy  efficiency  and  renewable
energy, who controls $16.8 billion in stimulus funds. Zoi (formerly the CEO
of  Al  Gore’s  ACP)  and  her  husband  hold  120,000  shares  in  Serious
Materials,  along  with  stock  options.  The  two  are  also  reported  to  hold  a
substantial  interest  in  the  Swiss  firm  Landis+Gyr,  which  makes  “smart
meters,” a central component of the administration’s “smart grid” plans.19

State Assemblyman Chuck DeVore (R-Irvine) and others are questioning
the  alleged  science  behind  such  economically  damaging  decisions,
particularly  in  light  of  the  CRU  e-mail  revelations.  He  observed,
“Combined with the $21 billion deficit we’re facing in the coming year, this
shows we ought to be focusing our attention on more mundane things—like
living  within  our  means.”  Then  he  added,  “To  use  this  all-encompassing
rubric  of  climate  change  as  a  power  grab  to  usurp  property  rights  is
something we shouldn’t be doing.”20

San Joaquin Valley to be turned into desert through water diversion aimed
at saving an obscure species of tiny delta smelt fish. Farmers in that area
that  once  fed  the  world  now  line  up  at  food  pantries.  Valley-wide
unemployment  averaging  17  percent  has  soared  upward  to  40  percent  in
some small towns.

The regulatory environment in California has turned the dreams of good
lives into nightmares for many who are leaving in hordes, taking much of
the  state’s  tax  base  with  them.  About  2.14  million  fled  to  other  states
between  2005  and  2007,  while  only  about  1.44  million  moved  in.
Meanwhile, the state's debt rises at a rate of about $25 million per day.

Texas benefits from California’s population and business migrations; the
state has realized 70 percent of all new US job growth since 2008. The state
also leads all others in the number of Fortune 500 companies headquartered
there  (sixty-four,  compared  with  fifty-six  in  New  York  and  fifty-one  in
California).  Much  of  this  prosperity  can  be  attributed  to  an  emphasis  in
Texas on laissez-faire markets and individual responsibility, which contrasts
with  California’s  reliance  upon  central  planning,  tax-supported  energy
subsidies, and social entitlement programs. At the same time, Texas is also
becoming  a  leader  in  wind  power  development,  applying  an  “all-of-the-
above” energy policy and no personal state income tax.

Bad Science—Sponsored by Us

 

for 

Who  paid 

that  goofy  science  speculation 

that  Governor
Schwarzenegger’s  scary  global  warming,  oceans  rising,  engulfed  land,
emission control–urgent report was based on? We did, of course, along with
additional contributions from generous California taxpayers to cover about
$150,000  in  presentation  costs.  After  all,  through  our  federal  and  state
governments, we pay for most science, good and bad, which is entrusted to
agencies and their minions to distribute, administer, or conduct.

To suggest that science research trickles down from government would
be  a  gross  understatement.  Actually,  it  cascades  from  mountains  on  high,
presided over by people whom we generally assume to be knowledgeable
and  objective.  Often,  we  might  assume  wrong.  This  occurs  when  a
particularly orthodox view becomes inculcated into government leadership
and surrogate organization power structures . . . Yes, exactly like man-made

global warming, for example. Then follow the rivers, streams, and creeks as
those influences spread.

Agencies get funding appropriations based upon how important they are,
or more accurately, how important we are persuaded to think they are. In
the  case  of  environmental  issues,  they  are  a  lot  more  important  if  they
appear  to  address  (certainly  not  waste)  a  crisis.  Climate  change,  a  topic
offering an opportunity to regulate something really dangerous, like natural
air, is just too wonderful to pass up.

Who populates these agencies? People with correct orthodox credentials,
of course. It helps a lot if they have published books or articles that favor
and advance those views, or at least associate with influential organizations
that  do.  Let’s  call  that  the  “orthodox  mainstream.”  Then  again,  most  of
those books and articles wouldn’t have been published at all if the authors
didn’t  have  good  science  credentials,  right?  They  would  need  to  have
undertaken research that was published in respected journals.

Farther downriver, the universities that support learned research and hire
scientists  to  conduct  it  depend  upon  money  from  federal  and  state
government  agencies  (again,  from  us).  To  compete  for  that  money  they
must  address  topics  that  are  recognized  by  the  orthodox  mainstream  as
being  very  important.  Only  then  can  they  hire  and  produce  people  who
write successful proposals to support staff to do the research to prepare the
papers that get published in the respected journals.

But  what  if  those  learned  people’s  papers  can’t  get  published  in  the
respected  journals  because  they  contradict  views  of  influential  orthodox
mainstream gatekeepers who attack their merit—as with, for example, the
exact  circumstances  exposed  in  the  CRU  e-mail  communications.  In  this
case,  those  scientists  wouldn’t  win  grants  and  contracts  (from  tax  and
tuition  money  we  supply)  to  gain  tenure  and  promotions  at  leading
universities and research laboratories, or to gain credentials to get hired by
the agencies and surrogate organizations that distribute the funding. Others
who play the game by rules of politics are likely to fare much better.

Where is responsible journalism, the “fourth branch of government,” in
all this? All too often its mainstream is very far downstream from real facts.
Besides, sensationalism sells much better than scholarship does, and it earns
invitations to alarmist briefings high up in the mountains of power whence
all waters flow.

Green Envy

 

“Saving the planet” makes for a great cover story to conceal power and
wealth redistribution agendas that have no such laudable purposes. This was
witnessed at the 2009 Copenhagen Summit, and is also evident on the US
national  scene.  As  Czech  president  and  economist  Vaclav  Klaus  has
observed,  environmentalism  has  become  a  banner  name  under  which
governments are given license to seize commanding heights of economies
and societies. Another name for this—dare we say it aloud?— is socialism,
and manipulated science is its servant.

In  the  1970s  and  early  1980s,  Third  World  countries,  by  force  of
numbers,  and  European  socialist  green  parties,  through  powers  of
aggressiveness,  seized  control  of  the  UN  and  began  calling  for  a  New
International  Economic  Order  (NIEO).  The  NIEO’s  central  goals  were
unambiguous: namely, to transfer unfair wealth from the industrialized West
to their majority; to establish global socialism; and to obtain postcolonial
reparations for perceived past misdeeds. That dream lives on in the spirit
and actions of the IPCC, the Kyoto Protocol, the Copenhagen Summit, and
the hearts and minds of those who have perpetuated the crusade—and will
continue to do so.

One such voice is Maurice Strong, then-executive director of the UN’s
Environment  Programme,  who  expressed  an  even  stronger  NIEO  view  in
his opening speech at the UN-sponsored Rio Earth Summit in 1992: “We
may get to the point where the only way of saving the world will be for
industrial  civilization  to  collapse.  Isn’t  it  our  responsibility  to  bring  this
about?”  Mr.  Strong  coauthored  a  book  titled  Earth  Charter  with  Mikhail
Gorbachev in 1992. The former president of the Soviet Union recognized
the  importance  of  using  climate  alarmism  to  advance  socialistic  Marxist
objectives, stating in 1996, “The threat of environmental crisis will be the
international disaster key to unlock the New World Order.” This may have
seemed like the last hope for that agenda following the USSR’s economic
and political collapse in 1991. Yet, even today, Gorbachev continues to call
for a kind of perestroika or “restructuring” of societies around the world,
starting  with  the  US;  he  argues  that  the  economic  crisis  since  2007
demonstrates  that  our  economic  policy  model  is  failing  and  must  be
replaced.

Former US senator Timothy Wirth agreed with Maurice Strong about the
urgency  of  using  climate  crisis  as  a  means  to  force  social  and  economic
change,  even  if  there  was  no  science  to  support  it.  The  senator,  who  had
been  arranging  prayer  breakfasts,  came  to  head  the  National  Religious
Partnership for the Environment. Later, as undersecretary of state for global
issues, he addressed the Rio Earth Summit audience, saying: “We have got
to ride the global warming issue. Even if the theory of global warming is
wrong, we will be doing the right thing in terms of economic policy and
environmental policy.”21

The  call  to  “stop  man-made  global  warming”  has  served  as  a  central
rallying  theme  in  socialist  warfare  against  US  free  market  capitalism  in
Europe as well as in Third World countries. While the big guns may appear
to be aimed at a CO
 enemy, the real target is likely to be our economy and
world dominance.

2

The  2000  Lisbon  Declaration—supported  by  a  group  of  “civil  society
organizations,”  including  EU  institutions,  the  World  Bank,  and  the  UN
Council of Europe, among other government, private, and corporate entities
—asserted that the EU would “leapfrog” the US in productivity and output
by  2010,  yet  by  2005,  it  was  apparent  that  this  forecast  was  misguided.
Rather  than  surpassing  the  US  in  its  share  of  world  output,  the  EU  was
losing ground at an increasing rate.22

The EU’s contributions to world GDP have fallen from about 36 percent
in 1969 to roughly 27 percent today. While that is slightly higher than the
US percentage of the world’s $47.9 trillion output, it should be recognized
that the EU has about 80 million more people than this country does. In a
few  years,  economic  power  of  both  the  US  and  the  EU  is  likely  to  be
eclipsed  by  that  of  Asia  thanks  to  booming  economic  developments  in
China and India. Yet the US can be expected to remain a world GDP leader
for decades to come, provided we avoid self-inflicted carbon penalties and
bring runaway government spending and largesse under control.

European  green  parties  with  major  influences  over  UN  climate-based
agendas are really angry at the US for not adopting legally binding Kyoto-
type  GHG  emission  restrictions.  They  also  advocate  massive  wealth
transfers from developed countries (primarily the US) to the Third World to
combat  alleged  global  warming  impacts.  Not  surprisingly,  the  so-called
Group of 77 developing countries is pushing this idea, insisting that it won’t
accept  tokenism.  Secretary  of  State  Hillary  Clinton’s  2009  Copenhagen

promise  to  raise  an  annual  $100  billion  contribution  for  this  purpose
signifies  that  the  Obama-Biden  administration  acknowledges  US  climate
transgressions  and  intends  to  make  amends.  The  big  question  is  whether
China will continue to lend us the necessary money.

Meanwhile, as the US government proceeds on a colossal borrowing and
spending binge, added impacts of cap-and-trade legislation upon economic
recovery  and  growth  warrant  true  alarm.  And  if  this  isn’t  frightening
enough,  think  about  new  mechanisms  that  have  been  put  in  place  to
accomplish carbon regulations even without congressional consent.23

regulate  carbon  emissions  by  declaring 

On the very first day of the 2009 Copenhagen Summit, the EPA claimed
authority 
them  an
“endangerment” to public health. Given the broad and intrusive influence
this ruling establishes over every aspect of our economic life, it represents
an  epic  circumvention  of  constitutionally  established 
legislative
responsibilities. If the timing of this announcement was intended to impress
less democratic world audiences in Copenhagen, there is little evidence of
success.  Hugo  Chavez  didn’t  appear  to  notice—and  got  most  of  the
applause.

to 

Restoring the Republic

 

The US has recently been witnessing sweeping governance changes that
are rapidly shifting power from the private sector and state governments to
federal elected and appointed officials, regulatory agencies, and politically
favored special interest lobbies. While this trend is not altogether new, its
acceleration and outreach are unparalleled at any other period since the end
of World War II. Setting aside the nationalization of much of the banking
and  automotive  industries  within  the  period  of  a  single  year,  along  with
aggressive  efforts  to  do  the  same  with  medical  and  insurance  providers,
consider  looming  prospects  for  climate-based  energy  legislation.  To  help
put  this  into  perspective,  let’s  review  dossiers  of  some  nonelected  people
who even have power to end-run constitutional roles of the US Senate and
Congress. They are called “czars,” and probably for valid reasons.

Global warming energy czar Carol Browner was formally appointed as
the Obama administration’s director of the White House Office of Energy
and Climate Change Policy. The president has outlined these goals in her

job description: “to create jobs, achieve energy security, and combat climate
change,  which  requires  integration  among  different  agencies;  cooperation
between  federal,  state,  and  local  governments;  and  partnerships  with  the
private sector.”24 These duties involve key aspects of three different cabinet-
level  departments:  the  EPA,  the  Energy  Department,  and  the  Interior
Department.  Ms.  Browner  has  stated  that  “we  face  an  environmental,  a
public  health,  and  an  economic  challenge  in  global  warming  unlike
anything we have faced so far.”25

Insiders believe that Ms. Browner probably has more actual power than
does  either  the  head  of  the  EPA  or  the  secretary  of  energy,  both  Senate-
confirmed  positions.  She  also  served  as  a  lead  negotiator  with  the
automobile industries regarding emission levels, and reportedly told them
“to  put  nothing  in  writing.”  Some  may  argue  that  her  intent  was  to
encourage the spokespeople to speak freely.

Heritage Foundation director B. Kenneth Simon and Matthew Spalding
of  the  foundation's  Center  for  American  Studies  both  believe  that
Browner’s activities appear to “be beyond congressional legislative intent”
and seem to “circumvent the authority of the EPA administrator.”26

Carol Browner formerly ran the EPA, and she also served on the board of
John Podesta’s Center for American Progress, which he cofounded with Al
Gore  and  George  Soros.  Podesta  also  cochaired  President  Obama’s
transition team.

The  Socialist  International,  an  umbrella  organization  for  many  of  the
world’s  social-democratic  parties,  including  Britain’s  Labour  Party,  listed
Ms. Browner as a member with distinction. She was also noted as a leader
of  its  Commission  for  a  Sustainable  World  Society,  which  advocates
“global  governance,”  believing  that  wealthy  nations  must  shrink  their
economies  to  address  global  warming.  Browner’s  name  and  profile  were
removed from the organization’s website in January 2009.

International climate czar (or “Special Envoy for Climate Change”) Todd
Stern served as former assistant to the president and as staff secretary in the
Clinton-Gore  administration.  Acting  as  the  administration’s  chief  climate
negotiator from 1993–1998. He is now a principal adviser on international
climate  policy  issues  and  strategies.27  Stern,  like  Browner,  was  associated
with the Center for American Progress; as a senior fellow there, he focused
upon climate change. He has been a strong supporter of the Kyoto Protocol
and a US cap-and-trade policy. As a top aide to President Clinton, he helped

is 

revealed 

to negotiate the Kyoto and Buenos Aires climate pacts, both of which were
unanimously rejected in principle by the US Congress. Stern places a great
deal of blame for global warming on US businesses.

for  climate  change, 

Science  and  technology  czar  John  Holdren,  a  point  man  in  the  White
House 
in  hacked  CRU  e-mall
correspondence  as  a  staunch  defender  of  debunked  research  by  Michael
“Hockey  Stick”  Mann.  At  that  time,  Holdren  was  working  at  the  Woods
Hole  Research  Center  in  Massachusetts,  an  independent  environmental
policy organization—not to be confused with the prestigious Woods Hole
Oceanographic  Institute.  In  a  letter  sent  on  November  23,  2009,  Holdren
defended  his  earlier  e-mail  correspondence:  “I’m  happy  to  stand  by  my
contributions to this exchange. I think anyone who reads about what I wrote
in its entirety will find it a serious and balanced treatment of the questions
of ‘burden of proof ’ in situations where science germane to public policy is
in dispute.”28

law 

In the book Ecoscience: Population, Resources, Environment, which he
coauthored with Population Bomb author Paul Ehrlich, Holdren wrote that
families  “contribute  to  general  social  deterioration  by  overproducing
children”  and  “can  be  required  by 
to  exercise  reproductive
responsibility.” Page 943 of the book suggests the creation of a “Planetary
Regime  to  act  as  an  international  superagency  for  population,  resources,
and environment.” The coauthors envisioned that “such a Planetary Regime
could  control 
the  development,  administration,  conservation,  and
distribution of all natural resources, renewable and nonrenewable, at least
insofar  as  international  implications  exist”  (emphasis  in  original).  That
regime  “might  be  given  responsibility  for  determining  the  optimum
population  for  the  world  and  for  each  region  and  for  arbitrating  [the]
various  countries’  shares  within  regional  limits.”  Possible  methods  of
population control the authors discussed are “sterilizing women after their
second  or  third  child”  and  adding  “a  sterilant  to  drinking  water  or  staple
foods.”29

EPA administrator Lisa Jackson isn’t actually a czar, but she looks like a
good  candidate.  Her  agency  ignored  and  quashed  internal  research  that
contradicted  the  scientific  validity  of  a  CO
  endangerment  finding.  Ms.
Jackson  then  announced  in  December  2009  that  an  EPA  “tailoring  rule”
would follow that would set a GHG emissions threshold of 25,000 tons per
year  for  regulators  under  the  Clean  Air  Act.  As  a  result,  any  new

2

construction  or  modifications  that  would  affect  GHG  emissions  would
require an application for permits that include “best available technology.”
The  tailoring  rule  GHG  threshold  would  affect  between  1  million  and  4
million construction facilities across the country. “This is certainly not an
ending,” Ms. Jackson said. “We will continue to work under the Clean Air
Act.”30

Secretary  of  Energy  Steven  Chu  doesn’t  like  to  consider  all  energy
options . . . not even the one that provides half of our current US electricity.
He has repeatedly said, “Coal is my worst nightmare.” Why does he dislike
coal? Fly ash! He claims that fly ash from coal burning is a hundred times
more  radioactive  than  radiation  emitted  by  nuclear  plants,  which  really
amounts to one hundred times nothing. Plus, most fly ash from coal-fired
plants is readily recovered and recycled as a primary ingredient in concrete,
stucco, and other products to greatly increase their strength. Mr. Chu also
appears  to  have  nighttime  hallucinations  about  global  warming,  having
warned,  “Climate  change  .  .  .  will  cause  enormous  resource  wars,  over
water,  arable  land,  and  massive  population  displacements.  We’re  talking
about  .  .  .  hundreds  of  millions  to  billions  of  people  being  flooded  out,
permanently.”31

Is climate change now a big Department of Labor consideration? And if
so,  why?  The  first  answer  is  probably  yes.  The  second  appears  to  come
straight out of the IPCC/Marx/Kyoto lesson plan. Hilda Solis, the Obama-
Biden  administration’s  labor  secretary,  stated  her  conviction  that  “I  am
fighting for environmental justice.”32

Nancy Sutley, chairwoman of the President’s Council on Environmental
Quality, explained during her Senate confirmation hearing that no agency
would be left out of the choir: “[Climate change] is an issue that will affect
the  entire  federal  government;  almost  no  agency  is  untouched  by  climate
change.”33

We can continue to debate human impacts upon global temperatures, but
there is one anthropogenic influence that we cannot escape: The dangerous
political climate we are witnessing today is entirely one of our making, and
it urgently needs to change.

Healthy Skepticism

 

Whom  can  we  trust?  We  rely  upon  information  from  respected
government,  scientific,  and  media  sources 
to  be
authoritative and objective. It is disconcerting when we discover that they
have deceived us about important matters. Misrepresentation regarding the
existence  and  causes  of,  and  the  urgent  interventions  against,  a  climate
crisis rank among the greatest deceptions of all.

that  we  assume 

Here are some real facts that we can be confident about:

2

2

2

2

1.  There is no scientific evidence that any climate crisis exists other
than the hardships periodically imposed upon affected regions as a
result  of  naturally  occurring  changes.  The  next,  now  overdue  Ice
Age will present a big crisis, but no one can predict when that will
happen. Enjoy these warm times of ecological and human bounty.

2.  Over the past several glacial and interglacial climate fluctuations,
atmospheric CO
 concentrations have generally increased after, not
before,  temperatures  have  risen.  This  is  because  warming  oceans
, and colder oceans absorb it. There doesn’t appear to be
release CO
much,  if  any,  correlation  between  CO
  contributions  from  human
activities  and  temperature  fluctuations.  Yup,  temperatures  have
fallen many times when CO
 levels have continued to rise, just as
they are now.
  Climate  models  cannot  predict  climate  change  events  or
consequences, although the scary warnings we constantly hear are
based upon them. Many climate forcing mechanisms remain poorly
understood,  and  all  interact  in  interdependent  and  complex  ways.
Most scientists who create and apply climate models know this and
will freely admit it. Claims by IPCC officials that confidence in such
models  is  increasing  are  misleading.  Accurate  forecasting  over
years,  much  less  decadal  or  multidecadal  periods,  has  never  been
demonstrated.

3. 

4.    Most  of  the  “greenhouse  effect”  predicted  in  climate  models
suggests  that  warming  should  be  greatest  at  mid-range  to  high
atmospheric  elevations  in  the  tropics,  yet  balloon  and  satellite
observations  show  cooling  there.  Water  vapor  is  by  far  a  more
important  GHG  than  is  CO
,  yet  even  together,  their  climate
contributions  are  likely  to  be  much  smaller  than  current  models
suggest.

2

5.    More  scientific  attention  is  now  being  directed  to  the  effects  of
solar activity upon climate. A low level of activity appears to match
the prolonged period of cooling that occurred during the Little Ice
Age, while an active Sun in the 1930s and again near the end of the
last century corresponds with observed warming. The current solar
cycle  is  the  longest  low-activity  event  witnessed  in  more  than  a
century.  This  suggests  that  the  cooling  observed  since  about  1998
may continue for some time.

6.  Multidecadal cycles in the ocean correlate quite closely with solar
cycles and global temperatures. The Pacific Ocean began to cool in
the late 1990s, and the Atlantic began to cool from its peak in 2004.
Warmer  oceans  from  the  1930s  to  the  1950s,  and  again  from  the
1980s  to  the  early  2000s,  caused  diminished  summer  Arctic  ice
extent.  Antarctic  ice  has  actually  been  increasing  at  a  record  pace
within the span of satellite monitoring history. Although Arctic ice
has been thinning at a rate of about 3 percent per decade, Antarctic
ice, which is twenty times more expansive, has been growing at 1
percent per decade. So, while the 2007 summer Arctic ice melt was
the biggest on record, the 2008 Antarctic ice melt was the smallest.34
Melting ocean ice doesn’t cause sea levels to rise anymore than do
melting ice cubes in a drink cause that level to rise in a glass. (Of
course, when you take a sip, it changes everything, so if you try this
experiment, try not to cheat.)

You, the Jury

 

The corruption of science exposed in the CRU e-mails is finally putting
man-made  warming  alarmism  on  trial  in  the  “court  of  public  scrutiny.”
Imagine that one after another the crisis claimants are called to testify. You,
a member of the jury, must determine if their legitimacy warrants trust.

First  on  the  stand  is  Al  Gore.  He  presents  a  lengthy  PowerPoint
presentation, complete with melting ice caps, drowning polar bears, rising
sea  levels,  marauding  hurricanes,  and  all.  He  ends  with  an  impassioned
pitch for cap-and-trade legislation as humankind’s best chance of salvation
from sins we have wrought upon our planet.

that  most  of 

Perhaps  on  cross-examination  we  discover 

those
“inconvenient facts” don’t hold up. We can forgive him. After all, scientists
disagree  on  many  points.  Let’s  further  acknowledge  that  it  is  really  okay
that  he  has  accumulated  a  large  fortune  promoting  green  products  he  has
financial  interests  in  and  that  he  plans  to  make  a  bundle  more  marketing
carbon  offsets.  It  can  be  argued  that  these  actions  only  demonstrate  true
conviction  in  his  cause.  Let’s  forget  that  the  annual  utility  budget  for  his
twenty-room Nashville home and pool house would pay for a new Toyota
Prius. Let’s give him some credit for bravery in purchasing a new $8.875
million  ocean-view  home  in  Montecito,  California—from  which  he  can
keep watch to warn us of a dangerously rising sea level and such. And we
might cut him some slack for apparently confusing the Earth with the Sun
in  asserting  that  the  temperature  of  our  planet’s  core  is  “several  million
degrees.” Even Nobel laureates can’t be expected to be right all the time.
But maybe his science is not entirely settled after all.

Next to testify is Dr. James Hansen, the father of global warming hysteria
and  Mr.  Gore’s  science  adviser.  He  continues  to  be  celebrated  in
mainstream media as a top climate expert. Never mind that his doomsday
predictions  over  the  past  3  decades  have  never  materialized,  that  he  is
linked to conspiratorial CRU e-mail correspondence, and that his claim of
record-high  2008  temperatures  was  proven  to  be  hot  air.  In  fairness,  his
warning  that  world  temperatures  are  balancing  at  a  “tipping  point”  is
proving  correct,  but  not  because  of  dangerous  CO
.  Once  again,
temperatures  have  been  tipping  downward  since  1998,  while  atmospheric
CO

 concentrations have risen.
In  this  scenario,  we  might  assume  that  testimony  offered  by  key
participants  in  the  CRU  e-mail  climate  science  debauchery  follows.  As
potential  subjects  of  legal  indictments,  perhaps  some  may  have  been
advised by their attorneys to remain silent. Likewise, we might assume that
the  IPCC,  which  used  CRU  data,  responds  only  with  a  brief  written
statement.  Essentially,  it  reaffirms  its  conclusion  that  global  warming
presents  a  continuing  threat;  that  the  IPCC  is  even  more  confident  in  its
predictive  climate  models; 
industrialized  nations,  are
responsible  for  a  looming  crisis;  and  that  $100  billion  in  reparations  to
other, less developed countries for our excesses won’t be nearly enough.35

Then, perhaps, we might hear testimony from a few of the six hundred
fifty  scientists  who  expressed  “contrary”  views  in  a  2008  US  Senate

that  we, 

2

2

the 

minority report prepared by Senator Inhofe.36 For example:

• 

•    Ivar  Giaever,  Nobel  Prize  winner  for  physics:  “I  am  a  skeptic.

Global warming has become a new religion.”
  UN  IPCC  Japanese  scientist  Kiminori  Itoh,  award-winning
environmental  physical  chemist:  “[Warming  fears  are  the]  worst
scientific scandal in history … When people come to know what the
truth is, they will feel deceived by science and scientists.”

•    Indian  geologist  Arun  Ahluwalia,  board  member  of  the  UN-
supported  International  Year  of  Planet  Earth:  “The  IPCC  has
actually become a closed circuit; it doesn’t have open minds … I am
really  amazed  that  the  Nobel  Peace  Prize  has  been  given  on
scientifically 
incorrect  conclusions  by  people  who  are  not
geologists.”

•    Finnish  scientist,  chemical  engineer,  and  former  Greenpeace
member  Jarl  Ahlbeck:  “So  far,  real  measurements  give  no  ground
for concern about a catastrophic future warming.”

•  Norwegian Space Center senior adviser solar physicist Pål Brekke:
“Anyone who claims that the debate is over and the conclusions are
firm has a fundamentally unscientific approach.”

•  Institute of Geophysics, National Autonomous University of Mexico
researcher  Victor  Manuel  Velasco  Herrera:  “The  models  and
forecasts of the UN IPCC are incorrect because they . . . are based
[only]  on  mathematical  models  and  presented  results  at  scenarios
that do not include, for example, solar activity.”

•    New  Zealand  professor  Geoffrey  Duffy,  Department  of  Chemical
and Materials Engineering, University of Auckland: “Even doubling
or  tripling  the  amount  of  carbon  dioxide  will  virtually  have  little
impact, as water vapor and water condensed on particles as clouds
dominate the worldwide scene and always will.”

•    Russian  geographer  and  Antarctic  ice-core  researcher  Andrei
Kapitsa: “The Kyoto theorists have put the cart before the horse. It
is global warming that triggers higher levels of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere, not the other way around … A large number of critical
documents  submitted  to  the  1995  UN  conference  in  Madrid
vanished without a trace. As a result, the discussion was one-sided

and  heavily  biased,  and  the  UN  declared  global  warming  to  be  a
scientific fact.”

•    Stanley  Goldberg,  US  government  atmospheric  scientist  at  the
Hurricane  Research  Division  of  NOAA:  “It  is  a  blatant  lie  to  put
forth  in  the  media  that  makes  it  seem  there  is  only  a  fringe  of
scientists who don’t buy into anthropogenic global warming.”

•    James  Peden,  atmospheric  physicist  formerly  with  the  Space
Research and Coordination Center in Pittsburgh: “Many [scientists]
are now searching for a way to break out (from promoting warming
fears), without having their professional careers ruined.”

•    Apollo  17  astronaut/geologist  Jack  Schmitt,  formerly  with  the
Norwegian  Geological  Survey  and  USGS:  “The  ‘global  warming
scare’  is  being  used  as  a  political  tool  to  increase  government
control over American lives, incomes, and decision making. It has
no place in society’s activities.”37

In  conclusion,  we  might  recall  remarks  offered  by  Czech  president
Vaclav Klaus during a speech at the Ambrosetti Forum, Villa d’Este, Italy,
in 2007:

The threat I have in mind is the irrationality with which the world
has accepted the climate change (or global warming) as a real danger
to the future of mankind, and the irrationality of suggested and already
implemented measures because they will fatally endanger our freedom
and  prosperity,  the  two  goals  we  consider—I  do  believe—our
priorities.

We  have  to  face  many  prejudices  and  misunderstandings  in  this
respect. The climate change debate is basically not about science; it is
about  ideology.  It  is  not  about  global  temperature;  it  is  about  the
concept of human society. It is not about nature or scientific ecology; it
is about environmentalism, about one— recently born—dirigistic and
collective  ideology,  which  goes  against  freedom  and  free  markets.  I
spent  most  of  my  life  in  a  communist  society,  which  makes  me
particularly sensitive to the dangers, traps, and pitfalls connected with
it.38

And  what  are  the  consequences  of  this  subterfuge?  They  are  costly.
Consider that billions of dollars are spent annually on climate science, only
to  have  much  of  the  most  important  information  distorted  for  ideological
and  political  purposes.  American  industries,  jobs,  and  revenues  may  be
forced to relocate overseas because of irrelevant CO
 emission regulations
that  other  countries  freely  ignore.  Environmentalism  predicated  on  false
premises blocks drilling in US waters, while unfriendly foreign coalitions
exploit these oil reserves. Coal plants that provide half of all US electricity
are  restricted  and  penalized,  while  uncompetitive  high-cost  and  low-
potential alternatives receive mandates and subsidies. Schemes are justified
to  price  and  trade  “carbon  sin  indulgences”  along  with  a  regulatory  EPA
power grab. Then there are also those therapeutic counseling expenses for
treatment of pandemic carbon footprint guilt sufferers.

Corrupt science that supports these travesties has many complicit agents.
It is perpetrated by sponsors who fail to provide competent oversight; by
ideologically,  politically,  and  financially  driven  authorities  who  twist  and
exploit conclusions; and by lockstep, headline-hungry media organizations
that  emphasize  sensationalism  over  substance.  And  we  can’t  forget  those
among  us  who,  through  complacency  and  denial  in  the  face  of  obvious
deception, willingly forfeit demands for accountability. When we abrogate
that responsibility, perhaps we become culpable too.

2

Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, the prosecution rests its case.

Chapter 12

EXERCISING US EXCEPTIONALISM

Bearing painful witness to the arrogance of unwarranted humility

on America’s behalf.

Now  that  we  understand  the  politics  and  people  behind  global
warming,  what  actions  can  we  take  to  mitigate  the  potentially  disastrous
consequences of such misguided pseudoscience?

First of all, we have to acknowledge the reality of the situation. Anyone
who has had an opportunity to visit other countries around the world should

recognize  America’s  exceptional  environmental,  social,  and  economic
achievements. Our environment—compared with the environments of other
developed  nations,  and  starkly  contrasted  with  those  of  communist
countries—is remarkable, clean, and improving. Real progress is occurring
in  the  development  of  highly  efficient  energy  production  and  utilization,
along  with  power  plant  emission  reductions  as  a  by-product.  Based  upon
the  amount  of  energy  used  to  produce  a  dollar  value  in  output,  the  US
voluntarily reduced energy intensity by 20 percent over the period between
1992  and  2004,  as  compared  to  only  11.5  percent  in  the  EU  under  a
mandatory  approach.  This  has  also  enabled  economic  growth,  which
averaged more than 3 percent annually between 1992 and 2005, compared
with about 1 percent in the EU prior to the recent global recession.

Despite  our  environmental  progress,  angry  views  toward  the  US  and
other developed countries expressed by detractors in less free and fortunate
parts of the world have gained a larger world stage with the advent of the
UN’s  climate-change  theater.  Eco-guilt  associated  with  demonization  of
CO
 emissions has been added to other sins of capitalism, including unfair
wealth, consumption, economic influence, and military power. Speaking to
like-minded  foreign  audiences,  our  own  president  has  apologized  for
America’s 
lack  of
sustained  engagement  with  neighbors,  and  dark  periods  of  history.  And
even  though  Nicaraguan  president  Daniel  Ortega,  Venezuelan  president
Hugo  Chavez,  and  other  unfriendly  leaders  have  expressed  strong
agreement,  they  still  don’t  like  him  or  us  any  better  for  offering  these
confessions.  Apparently,  some  of 
the  2009
Copenhagen Summit meetings, where riots broke out, don’t either.

imperfections,  arrogance, 

international  mistakes, 

2

those  present  during 

Despite expanding world economies embracing globalism through open
market capitalism, many would like to turn their international clocks back
to what they regard to be the better “good old days.” Thomas Friedman, in
his book The World Is Flat, attributes much of this sentiment to the strongly
anti-American  and  anti-globalization  movement  that  emerged  at  the  1999
World Trade Organization conference in Seattle. What began as a primarily
Western-driven phenomenon has subsequently gained influence throughout
the  world,  and  the  movement  now  represents  a  convergence  of  several
ideological groups.

One motivation is attributed to upper-middle-class American liberal guilt
in reaction to the incredible wealth and power the US amassed following

the  fall  of  the  Berlin  Wall  and  the  rise  of  the  dot-com  balloon.  Old  left
socialists,  anarchists,  and  Trotskyites,  in  their  alliances  with  protectionist
trade unions, advance another motivation. Particularly strong anti-American
sentiments arose in Europe and the Islamic world over disparities between
American economic, cultural, military, and political power versus those in
other countries after the implosion of the Soviet empire. Groups concerned
with governance influence, ranging from environmentalists to trade activists
to NGOs, became part of populist antiglobalization. Others, who constituted
a more amorphous group, were more generally concerned about the speed
at which the “old world” was disappearing and becoming globalized.

Many of the same people who are behind the global warming hysteria are
also  strongly  opposed 
to  economic  globalization.  They  perceive
globalization as a tool by which wealthy nations exploit poor nations in the
same way they exploit the environment. They view the American capitalist
free  market  engine  as  an  evil  machine  that  drives  globalism,  and  the
economic prosperity it yields as a sin against “social justice.”

Let’s  briefly  review  those  claims  on  the  basis  of  the  real  social  justice

that such detractors purport to care so much about.

According to the World Bank, about 375 million people in China lived in
extreme poverty (on less than an equivalent of $1/day) in 1990. The number
of  impoverished  Chinese  dropped  to  212  million  by  2001.  If  the  current
trend holds, only about 16 million Chinese will live on less that $1/day by
2015.

In  Southeastern  Asia—primarily  India,  Pakistan,  and  Bangladesh—the
number of people living on less than $1/day dropped from 462 million in
1990 to roughly 431 million by 2001, and that number is projected to be
216 million by 2015.

Now,  compare  those  numbers  with  those  in  sub-Saharan  Africa,  which
has  been  slow  to  become  part  of  globalized  markets.  There,  about  227
million people lived on less than $1/day in 1990. By 2001, there were 313
million people living in poverty, and the World Bank expects the number
will grow to 340 million by 2015.

Friedman  argues  that  the  world’s  poor  don’t  resent  those  who  are  rich
nearly as much as left-wing parties in the developed world imagine. Rather,
what they really resent is not having a pathway to get richer and cross the
line into the world’s middle-class opportunities.

As Deng Xiaoping declared when he released the Chinese economy from
its communist shackles and opened it to a free market system, “To get rich
is glorious.” He justified those actions with one sentence: “Black cat, white
cat, all that matters is that it catches mice.” India and Russia have followed
the  same  road  since  the  early  1990s,  and  together  with  China,  they  have
become competitive economic and technology forces.1

Ironically, Americans are now having to combat attacks from within the
very same economic system that offers hope and progress to other countries
now  following  our  successful  model.  If  a  greater  example  of  true  social
justice exists elsewhere, where is that place? Those who believe they know
might do well to expand their travel experiences abroad.

America’s Abundant Opportunities: Capitalizing on

Capitalism
 

Our nation remains a land of unique and enviable opportunity, the home
of the American Dream. Our history—and those participants who provided
the  foundational  visions,  courageous  sacrifices,  and  tools  of  science  and
industry  that  created  this  nation—warrants  no  apology.  We  have  learned
from past mistakes and are better for having recognized them and applying
those valuable lessons. We are also blessed with vast and diverse resources,
natural and human, and we share them generously as good and concerned
global citizens. Our position as leading world power is regarded as both a
privilege and an often-thankless obligation.

Yes, we care about our environment, and we acknowledge the need for
legislative and regulatory incentives and controls to protect it. Yet this will
not be accomplished by undermining the economic system that provides the
financial,  technical,  and  social  resources  needed  to  make  improvements.
Nor  are  these  goals  served  by  irresponsible  climate  crisis  fearmongering
and  exaggerated  alternative  energy  capacity  projections,  which,  when
exposed, only destroy confidence in the honest science and reporting that
are essential as a basis for sound decisions.

And  that  fearmongering  and  fraudulent  reporting  is  definitely  being
revealed:  through  exposure  of  damning  words  and  writings  of  false
prophets and profiteers; through direct observable testimony presented by
Mother Nature; and through conscientious efforts of some who have dared

to  challenge  dogma  served  up  by  high  priests  of  gloom-and-doom
orthodoxy.  These  dedicated  and  valiant  people  include  Senator  Inhofe,
Stephen  McIntyre,  Ross  McKitrick,  Richard  Lindzen,  Fred  Singer,  Roy
Spencer,  Anthony  Watts,  and  many  others  previously  discussed  in  this
book, plus the hundreds more who aren’t.

Rediscovering America

 

We have historically taken pride in “American know-how,” an ability to
recognize  marketable  opportunities  in  problems,  unlimited  capacities  for
invention, and willingness to proactively accept investment risks in pursuit
of  uncertain  rewards.  We  are  a  culture  of  creativity  that  is  recognized,
envied,  and  resented  around  the  world,  as  exemplified  by  our  music,
fashions, movies, sciences, and technologies. We have advanced medicine,
expanded agricultural and industrial productivity, and opened new frontiers
beyond our planet for peaceful purposes.

America  is  a  nation  without  ethnic,  racial,  gender,  or  class  boundaries.
Excellent  educational  opportunities  are  accessible  to  all  who  truly  seek
them. These resources include public and private institutions at all levels,
technical  specialization  programs,  community  colleges,  and  an  enormous
number and variety of distinguished universities for advanced studies that
attract international scholars.

So far, that’s the good news. But there are some more sobering aspects
regarding America’s education and innovation circumstances as well. Many
of the technical programs in top-ranked US universities are now dominated
by a majority of students from Asia and India, who are often supported by
their own nation's scholarships. These are the advanced math, science, and
engineering fields that tend to drive innovation in today’s technologically
competitive world. Foreign attendees, as a general rule, also tend to enter
our institutions with stronger math and science backgrounds, achieve higher
class  rankings,  and  return  to  their  home  countries  enriched  by  their  US
experiences.2

Asians,  in  particular,  appear  to  be  setting  the  international  pace  for
advanced science and math at all educational levels. Some indication of this
is  revealed  by  results  of  the  2003  international  Trends  in  International
Mathematics and Science Study involving half a million fourth- and eighth-

grade students from forty-one countries, including the US. The assessment
concluded that 44 percent of all eighth-graders in Singapore scored at the
most  advanced  level  in  math,  as  did  38  percent  from  Taiwan.  At  an
IntelScience Fair in 2004, Chinese students won thirty-four awards, more
than any other Asian country, including three top global awards.3

In  China,  strong  math  and  science  backgrounds  are  prerequisites  for
admittance  to  the  best  universities  or  to  be  hired  by  foreign  corporations
operating there. The Microsoft research center in Beijing is one of the most
sought-after  work-places  there,  and  the  competition  is  fierce.  There  is  a
popular saying, “If you are one in a million, there are 1,300 people just like
you.”4

Do  leaders  of  our  national  government  subscribe  to  this  philosophy?
Here is what John Holdren, director of the White House Office of Science
and Technology Policy, told students attending a meeting on April 10, 2010,
sponsored by the American Association for the Advancement of Science:
“We can’t expect to be number one in everything indefinitely.” Apparently,
that  goal  would  be  overreaching,  and  it  is  no  longer  encouraged  in  our
young  people.  Maybe  social  justice  promoted  by  Marx  and  the  UN
embodies  a  need  for  globally  distributed  scientific  and  technological
equality as well.

Whereas  most  Chinese  policy  makers  have  engineering  and  science
backgrounds,  the  majority  of  ours  are  lawyers.  Perhaps  this  raises  a
question regarding which nation will be best prepared for future leadership:
one  that  innovates  or  one  that  regulates?  If  China  is  now  embracing
principles  that  led  us  to  where  we  are  today,  perhaps  we  might  turn  our
attention to relearning from our past … and from the Chinese. We need to
get educated.

Free Market Entrepreneurship

 

And  what  about  “rugged  American  individualism,”  the  spirit  where
anything  you  can  dream  is  possible,  Horatio  Alger  rags-to-riches  stories,
Dale Carnegie confidence, and all that? Is that kind of thinking still legal?
Will it unfairly tilt the playing field to favor those who lust for success over
those who are less willing to compete? Will it create income disparities and
exploit  labor  markets?  Those  who  imagined  that  such  arguments  were

settled with the collapse of the Soviet Union and the embrace of capitalism
by China and Russia would be wrong. It seems that many people who enjoy
the products and prosperity created by entrepreneurship—the jobs it creates,
and the services it provides—aren’t comfortable with the ambitions of those
who practice it. Instead, they are more inclined to place faith in government
regulatory  mechanisms  rather  than  market  forces  to  provide  economic
equilibrium, progress, and social justice.

Government  interventions  into  free  market  mechanisms  can  have
unfortunate  consequences,  as  evidenced  by  US  energy  policies  where
Congress is now picking the winners and losers. Examples are the ethanol
debacle promoted under an “energy security” banner; price controls that led
to  the  gasoline  crisis  of  1974;  CO
emission  restrictions  that  are  blocking
development  of  fossil-fueled  power  plants;  mandated  alternative  fuel
purchases that drive up consumer costs; and restrictions on offshore drilling
that afford competitive advantages for foreign-owned companies operating
in our Gulf of Mexico neighborhood. Michael Economides speaks of some
penalties in his book The Color of Oil: “Regulations, unless imposed as part
of a well-thought-out, long-term national policy, stifle rugged individualists
and  capitalists.  Worse  even  in  developed  nations,  regulations  can  make
local  industry  comfortable  with,  and  then  dependent  on,  government-
mandated  market  reforms.  This,  of  course,  is  tremendously  destructive
because  it  thwarts  competition  and  entrepreneurialism,  two  of  the  most
important elements of economic success.”5

2

Real  or  imagined  crises  can  provoke  knee-jerk,  stopgap  government
regulatory  responses  that  are  painfully  costly  and  ineffective.  Global
climate change/CO
 alarmism is being used to block development and use
of fossil resources through a variety of legal and political actions, including
the Endangered Species Act listing of polar bears and the Supreme Court
characterization of CO
 as a pollutant. The latter decision now enables the
EPA to regulate CO

 emissions under the Clean Air Act.

The premises underlying virtually all this are the unproven IPCC climate
model apocalyptic scenarios and political agenda–tweaked summaries that
have never developed quantifiable links or consequences, either human or
natural, between CO
 and global warming. Even if this were not the case,
we can learn much from (1) failed EU attempts to achieve Kyoto Protocol
emission  reduction  targets,  (2)  EU  nations’  inabilities  to  meet  escalating
energy  needs  through  renewables,  and  (3)  resulting  shifts  among  EU

2

2

2

2

members  toward  fossils  and  nuclear  energy.  Why  repeat  their  earlier
mistakes?

Globalization versus Global Governance

 

It  is  time  to  differentiate  between  energy  security  and  energy
independence as well as between international partnering and subordination
to  international  authority.  National  pride  is  no  cause  for  shame,  and
strength, both economic and military, needs no apology. Many have worked
successfully and sacrificed greatly to endow America with these gifts. It is
our responsibility to preserve them, apply them, and pass them along to the
generations that follow. Quite understandably, some other nations have the
same idea, and we must respect that fact.

America  will  continue  to  depend  upon  oil  imports  for  the  foreseeable
future.  We  are  not  alone  in  this  regard,  nor  do  we  have  the  purchasing
leverage  we  once  enjoyed.  The  largest  US  oil  company,  ExxonMobil,
controls  only  about  1  percent  of  global  oil  reserves,  putting  it  far  behind
many  large  nationally  owned  companies  such  as  Saudi  Aramco,  NIOC
(Iran),  Pemex  (Mexico),  PDVSA  (Venezuela),  and  CNPC  (China).  As
world demands increase, so do the power and influence of Arab and Islamic
states  (i.e.  Saudi  Arabia,  Dubai,  and  Iran),  along  with  the  economic
purchasing power of China, India, and other developing countries.6

Global oil competition has become the dominant forcing factor driving
world  trade  and  international  military  alignments.  Accordingly,  we  must
realize that national security and energy security are codependent priorities.
Energy security is essential if the US is to maintain the economic strength
necessary  to  compete  in  all  world  trade  markets,  along  with  the  military
strength to protect our national and allied interests from aggressors. In this
regard,  our  energy  industries  are  the  first  and  arguably  most  vital  line  of
defense.

Just like other nations, we must diversify our access to energy sources of
all  types.  One  aspect  of  this  pertains  to  geographical  sourcing,  where  we
work to reduce dependence upon oil from the Middle East, Venezuela, and
other volatile parts of the world. Doing so, however, does not preclude all
possible  efforts,  including  diplomacy,  economic  support,  and  antiterrorist

actions,  to  enhance  stability  in  those  regions.  Our  security  is  linked  to
theirs.

We can participate in helping other nations develop energy resources as
trading partners, just as other countries are doing. Examples are investment
and assistance in oil and gas drilling and operations (e.g., China); refinery
development  and  services  (e.g.,  India);  and  advances  in  nuclear  electric
technologies (e.g., France, South Africa, and Japan). A key opportunity is to
provide  technologies  and  assistance  in  reprocessing  spent  nuclear  wastes
into fuels that cannot therefore be used against other nations for weapons.

The US can reduce dependence upon foreign oil and demands upon our
croplands by importing ethanol from Brazil. Produced from sugar cane, it is
a  much  more  energy-efficient  alcohol  source  than  is  corn.  This  will  once
again  encourage  American  farmers  to  diversify  crop  production,  relieve
consumer food costs, and accommodate lucrative and humanitarian export
advantages.

Yes,  America  can  and  should  continue  to  develop  and  expand  use  of
renewable  wind,  solar,  and  biotech  capacities,  along  with  hydropower,
geothermal, and hydrogen energy to the extent this makes sense. We should
not  be  misled,  however,  to  imagine  that  these  sources  will  promise  any
degree of energy security or independence, however greatly we might wish
that  to  be  the  case.  Much  greater  potential  lies  in  developing  improved
methods to optimize use of our large coal and shale reserves through clean
coal  technologies  and  transportation-fuel  derivatives.  These  will  become
even more attractive as foreign oil and gas demands continue to add market
pressures, which will also make support for expanded domestic drilling a
survival necessity for political aspirants.

Rational Environmentalism

 

All  responsible  people  care  about  human  impacts  of  energy  practices
and other activities upon the natural environment. Terrible examples include
the  inexcusable  Chernobyl  nuclear  reactor  failure,  the  massive  pipeline
leaks  in  Russia  that  spilled  10  percent  or  more  of  the  oil  en  route,  and
horrendous  air  pollution  conditions  in  China.  It  is  also  responsible  to
recognize  a  need  to  preserve  energy  resources  for  future  generations
through conservation efficiencies. Who can argue with that?

Just as everything humans have done in the name of industrial progress
hasn’t  been  kind  to  the  environment,  it  shouldn’t  be  assumed  that
everything  is  bad  either.  Yet  the  modern-day  environmental  activist
movement  tends  not  to  see  it  that  way.  If  there  is  a  perceived  climate
change, then it must be our fault, and the consequences must be dire. Since
industry  creates  pollution,  then  all  emissions,  including  CO
,  must  be
pollutants. If glaciers appear to be melting more rapidly than they were a
few decades before, then we must be responsible, and the condition must be
irreversible.

2

Maybe  it’s  time  to  apply  some  constructive  hindsight.  Not  so  many
decades ago, the glaciers advanced, and times were not really good at all.
And  while  industrialization  has  changed  our  planet,  the  technologies  and
progress  that  accompanied  it  have  not  been  entirely  negative.  As
civilizations  have  evolved,  so  have  sanitary  conditions.  Life  expectancies
have more than doubled since the times when raw sewage was heaped upon
the  streets  of  grand  Greek  and  Roman  empires  and  plagues  and  famines
devastated rural populations.

So much for the romantic visions of a peaceful, nirvana-like agrarian life
in  balance  with  nature.  There  are  big  differences  between  environmental
stewardship  ideals,  which  most  of  us  subscribe  to,  and  the  ideologically
moralistic, antidevelopment, obstructionist activism that exemplifies much
of today’s environmental zealotry. Premised on pseudoscientific rationale,
publicized  through  expensive  ad  campaigns  and  mainstream  media
messages, and lawyered up for battle, today’s green activist movement has
asserted dangerous influences over our energy-driven social, economic, and
security prospects.

What can we do to preserve and advance the energy priorities we care

about? It’s not going to be easy, but there is some hope.

To  begin  with,  we  can  seek  and  demand  objective  and  informed  news
sources  so  that  we  know  the  facts  and  keep  abreast  of  what  is  going  on
around us. The Internet— blog sites and all—is a tremendous resource for
data and opinions that cover all sides of events and issues. It’s remarkable
what the mainstream media doesn’t tell us, and equally amazing how often
they get the facts wrong in what they selectively present.

We can exert influences over who represents our interests in the arena of
politics, and we can tell them what we care about. We can support those we

trust through campaign participation, funding contributions, and votes. And
we can hold them accountable to earn that continued trust.

We  can  prepare  our  children  for  the  future  through  education  and
example. We can encourage them to develop survival knowledge in math
and sciences and to appreciate the importance of US and world history as
well. We can become involved with their schools and take interest in their
classroom and homework activities to find out what they are learning. Some
of that may prove to be alarmingly misguided.

Responsible Resourcefulness

 

Americans  will  experience  increasing  market  pricing  pressures  to
practice more effective energy conservation. In this regard, we must work to
do  more  with  less,  not  simply  try  to  do  less  using  less,  applying
retrogressive, utopian, ideological fantasies. If we can’t drill or dig our way
out of fossil-fuel energy dependence, imagining that we can starve our way
out doesn’t make any sense either. Fossil-fuel energy currently drives our
economy  and  progress.  It  finances  the  development  of  technologies  and
applications  that  are  more  efficient  and  environmentally  friendly.  It
provides  jobs—  yes,  for  coal  miners  and  oil  field  workers,  but  also  for
environmentalists  who  are  supported  by  energy 
industry–dependent
revenues.

Conservation is not just a matter of using less to do more; it also involves
using less of what is most limited so that it can be preserved for uses that
are more important. Why, for instance, should we use so much natural gas
for electricity if that power can be generated by nuclear plants that are even
cleaner?  That  natural  gas  can  be  used  for  transportation  fuel  to  reduce
drains on petroleum reserves and imports. How can we characterize wind
power as “free energy” if its use consumes lots of natural gas as a spinning
reserve?  And  why  would  we  want  to  use  natural  gas  as  a  source  for
hydrogen  when  the  direct  use  of  that  gas  is  so  much  more  efficient  and
safe? If we switch to electric plug-in cars, where will that energy needed to
recharge  the  batteries  come  from?  How  does  biofuel  reduce  fossil-fuel
demands  if  it  requires  nearly  an  equal  amount  to  grow  and  process  the
plants?

It’s  time  to  look  beyond  green  slogans  and  pursue  real  solutions.  The
marketplace, not politics, will ultimately determine which technologies will
succeed. Allowing this to happen may be one of the biggest energy security
challenges of all.

Transformational Trends

 

Can America do better? Yes, we can, and we are doing better. A major
report  released  in  May  2008  by  the  American  Council  for  an  Energy-
Efficient  Economy  (ACEEE)  observes  that  US  energy  consumption,  as
measured  per  dollar  of  GDP,  has  been  slashed  by  half  since  1970.7  The
report, prepared with support from the Civil Society Institute, the Kendall
Foundation, and the North American Insulation Manufacturers Association,
projected  that  use  of  cost-effective  technologies  can  reduce  US  energy
consumption by an additional 25 to 30 percent or more over the next 20 to
25 years.

The  ACEEE  report  cites  strong  evidence  of  progress  in  a  variety  of
energy  conservation  arenas.  Annual  investments  in  energy  efficiency
technologies  currently  support  1.6  million  US  jobs,  and  the  $300  billion
invested in 2004 was three times the amount spent on the traditional energy
infrastructure. The resulting energy saved that year was roughly equivalent
to  operations  of  forty  midsize  coal-fired  or  nuclear  plants.  Since  1970,
energy  efficiency  improvements  have  met  about  three-fourths  of  new
energy-related  service  demands.  The  annual  energy  efficiency  technology
market  is  projected  to  grow  by  more  than  $400  billion  by  2030,  with
investments over that period approaching $700 trillion.8

Can  we  interest  you  in  a  bargain  price  new  or  used  SUV?  Either  one
should be pretty easy to find. Consumers were gradually edging away from
big gas-guzzlers as gasoline prices were rising over the past couple of years,
but when pump pain reached $4 per gallon, many began to run. According
to the Kelley Blue Book, the resale value of a 3-year-old Cadillac Escalade
SUV  plummeted  24  percent  in  2008,  to  $24,500,  about  twice  the  rate  of
decline  two  years  earlier.  During  that  time  a  3-year-old  Honda  Civic  lost
only 8 percent of its value.9

America is becoming energy-conservation conscious because there is no
other choice. Many of the adjustments we can make to dramatically reduce

fuel and power use will be relatively inexpensive and painless relative to
the much-larger burdens of not doing so. We can purchase smaller and more
fuel-efficient cars without any real sacrifice of convenience or mobility. We
can  modify  our  driving  habits  and  opt  for  public  transportation  in  many
instances,  particularly  as  services  improve—and  they  most  certainly  will.
We can downsize our homes, plan new ones that apply natural conservation
principles, and upgrade windows and insulation to control heat transfer. We
can  reduce  energy  consumption  for  pool  heating  through  simple  devices,
and the simplest of all is by not heating them. We can use solar water and
space  heating,  and  geothermal  heating  and  cooling  in  locales  where  that
possibility  is  available.  We  can  install  power-efficient  illumination  and
other  devices,  adjust  thermostats,  and  turn  off  air  conditioners  and  lights
when  we  don’t  need  them.  We  can  recycle  aluminum  and  other  reusable
materials,  and  we  can  consume  a  lot  less  water,  too.  These  things  are
already beginning to happen, but some transitions—building infrastructure
redesigns  and  retrofits,  automobile  replacements,  and  upgraded  public
transportation services, for instance—will take some time, and will never
entirely alleviate sustained energy demands.

None of these adaptations need impose significant hardships or seriously
compromise satisfying lifestyles. And as they increasingly become common
practice, even small changes will make big differences on a national scale.
Imagine the significance of reducing transportation fuel use by 50 percent
and potentially doing the same through residential energy economies. No,
that won’t happen overnight. But the process is already beginning.

Demographic pressures, technology developments and energy challenges
will profoundly transform many aspects of future American life. Failure to
prepare for those changes will have unacceptable consequences. Fuel and
power  shortages  resulting  in  higher  costs  will  accelerate  relocations  of
households and businesses to warmer locales, particularly those with good
access  to  energy  sources.  The  result  will  be  to  leave  poorer  and  older
residents  behind.  These  shortfalls  will  amplify  competition  among
important  user  sectors  and  groups,  including  military,  manufacturing,
agriculture,  and  transportation.  International  relationships  and  commerce
will  be  impacted  in  major  ways,  such  as  shifts  in  production  and  trade,
business travel and tourism, and geopolitical tensions and alignments. The
circumstances we face are daunting.10

The  US  population  more  than  tripled  during  the  20th  century  to  reach
300 million in 2006, up from 200 million 39 years earlier; it is expected to
grow to more than 390 million by 2050. Although this growth rate is nearly
six times lower than that of many less developed countries, consumption of
energy, food, and natural resources continues to expand, and the amount of
land  available  for  agricultural  production  continues  to  decrease.  While
population growth due to birth rates is relatively slow, people are tending to
live longer, adding to costs for medical services that compete for energy and
food  budgets.  About  40  percent  of  our  country's  growth  is  from
immigration—both  legal  and  illegal—contributing  more  than  1  million
persons of all ages annually.

A large number of the baby boomers who are now entering retirement are
downsizing  from  detached  single-family  dwellings  to  much  smaller
apartments,  condominiums,  and  patio  homes.  In  2006,  this  generation  of
more  than  50  million  began  turning  sixty  at  the  rate  of  one  every  eight
seconds. Condominiums are becoming very popular in suburban as well as
metropolitan settings for a variety of reasons, both for empty nesters and for
younger  purchasers.  One  reason  is  the  recent  and  severe  downturn  in  the
economy and job market. Such moves also avoid costs and responsibilities
associated  with  building  and  lawn  maintenance,  and  they  provide  “lock-
and-go”  security  convenience  that  frees  residents  to  travel.  Newer  units,
whether  converted  from  existing  structures  or  built  from  the  ground  up,
tend  to  feature  quality  construction  with  improved  weatherproofing  and
insulation.11

Across  America,  passenger  and  freight  trains  are  gaining  appeal.  June
2008 witnessed 2.5 million Amtrak riders, a record for any month and up 12
percent  from  the  previous  year.12  Throughout  the  US,  the  number  of
commuters who abandoned cars for trains increased by about 15 percent in
some  major  cities  during  2007  as  gasoline  prices  soared  above  $4  per
gallon.

Many  local  transit  systems  are  rushing  to  add  train  cars  and  tracks  to
accommodate  escalating  demands.  A  new  rail  tunnel  is  planned  to  pass
under  the  Hudson  River  from  New  Jersey  to  lower  Manhattan,  and  an
entirely new line in New Jersey will connect Newark to coastal suburbs to
the  south  and  east.  The  Washington,  DC,  Metro  is  considering  extended
service  from  Georgetown  across  the  Potomac  River  to  Rosslyn,  Virginia,
and on to Dulles Airport. Salt Lake City is looking to add 70 miles of new

rail  to  its  commuter  suburbs.  Houston  proposes  to  quadruple  its  existing
new 8-mile rail network over the next few years, and Dallas plans to double
its  35-mile  local  system.  Seattle  proposes  to  add  40  miles  of  new  track
beyond the 16 miles now under construction, and new cars are being added
to Southern California lines, which occasionally operate at standing-room-
only capacities.

Sky-high jet fuel costs will increasingly discourage discretionary airline
travel due to higher ticket prices and service cutbacks. Airlines are already
reducing  numbers  of  flights  and  eliminating  less  profitable  destinations,
leaving  many  cities  without  regular  links.  These  conditions  are  likely  to
influence  more  and  more  Americans  to  vacation  within  the  contiguous
forty-eight states rather than abroad, and they will promote a greater market
for passenger train services in general.

Trains offer many inherent advantages. They are energy efficient when
they attract high ridership rates. And unlike cars, they are unencumbered by
congested freeways, delays, stress, and parking problems. They also allow
passengers  to  avoid  long  walks  and  waits  in  crowded  airline  terminals,
flight delays and cancellations due to weather, and uncertain arrival times.

America must develop a modern, expansive, and seamless passenger rail
infrastructure  with  nationwide  high-speed  services.  Other  countries  are
doing  the  same.  France  is  expanding  its  high-speed  TGV  network,  and
Spain and Italy are creating new ones. Germany plans to sell 24.9 percent of
Deutsche Bahn, a government-owned railway operator, in a public offering,
with  two-thirds  of  the  proceeds  earmarked  for  track  expansion  and  other
upgrades. Russia intends to add more than 5,000 miles of track by 2015,
including a new Trans-Siberian service.

China  has  completed  a  record-breaking  high-altitude  rail  link  between
Qinghai and Tibet, with a section that runs at 16,500 feet above sea level
and thus requires pressurized cars. Beijing plans to invest $160 billion over
the next 3 years to add 10,000 miles of new track to an existing 56,000-mile
network. About half of the expansion will be dedicated to rapid trains that
will operate at speeds of up to 200 miles per hour.

America’s rail freight industry has been doing very well since legislation
was passed nearly 30 years ago allowing companies the freedom to set rates
competitively  and  sell  off  money-losing  lines.  This  legislation  prompted
mergers  that  have  improved  operating  efficiencies  and  implementation  of

such new technologies as computer-controlled loading at freight yards that
have significantly lowered costs.

One of the most important fuel economy breakthroughs and trends may
prove  to  be  outside  the  energy  production,  building  construction,  and
transportation  sectors,  which  get  most  of  the  attention.  The  recent
development and exploding popularity of personal computers and Internet-
based telecommunications can be expected to impact future US commuting
and long-range transportation habits in important ways.

Telecommunications  and  teleconferencing  have  already  begun  to  make
much business travel unnecessary altogether. More and more Americans are
now working from home or other locations of their choice with little or no
need to commute anywhere, saving time, energy, and money in the process.
This advantage also applies to corporations that can utilize teleconferencing
to  dramatically  reduce  their  need  for  national  and  international  business
travel as well as for large, centralized management infrastructures that are
costly to maintain.

Advanced real-time video and data transfer technologies have opened up
remarkable new domestic and global enterprise opportunities for people and
organizations  everywhere.  Included  are  individuals  who  purchase  or  sell
personal  items  on  eBay;  small  manufacturers  and  consultants  that  market
products  and  services;  businesses  that  conduct  meetings  with  overseas
divisions,  affiliates,  and  clients;  and  scientific  and  professional
organizations engaged in workshops and conferences. These activities and
more  can  occur  without  the  need  to  purchase  extra  gasoline  or  airline
tickets, book expensive hotel rooms, pick up meal and entertainment tabs,
or  spend  days  or  longer  periods  away  from  families  and  obligations  that
compete with a work/travel schedule.

Just as necessity is the mother of invention, innovation is a parental agent
of 
intervention  and  adaptation.  Notwithstanding  some  adjustment
challenges,  societal  conservation  responses  born  out  of  necessities  and
technological  progress  can  ultimately  be  assimilated  into  painless  and
satisfying lifestyles. Advancing information and communication networks
may  not  fully  substitute  for  physical  travel  and  face-to-face  interpersonal
contact, but they may free many to live and work where they choose, avoid
fuel-  and  time-costly  transport,  and  wirelessly  connect  us  at  all  times  to
global  contacts  and  markets.  We  may  downsize  our  homes  and  cars  and
realize that we live just as comfortably and arrive just as soon. As we turn

to public transportation, it is likely that the services will improve, becoming
more seamless and convenient.

Embracing Changes and Challenges

 

Two realities are quite clear: (1) that the short era of inexpensive energy
resources  is  nearing  an  end;  and  (2)  that  there  are  no  single  or  simple
solutions.  No  known 
technology  advancement  or  combination  of
advancements  will  satisfy  the  needs  of  uncontrolled  consumption.  The
future we experience and introduce to those who follow will depend instead
upon our human resources of vision, intellect, creativity, and discipline. We
must  apply  all  available  means  to  expand  the  development  and  use  of
renewable  as  well  as  other  resources,  yet  recognize  their  realistic
limitations.  We  must  strive  to  implement  efficient  processes  and  systems
that  minimize,  recycle,  and  reuse  wastes.  We  must  apply  personal  and
corporate lifestyles that do more with less, recognizing that this makes good
economic and moral sense.

Our  human  ability  to  gain  knowledge  about  changes  we  are  imposing
upon our planet provides opportunities to adapt our living habits, industries,
and  technologies  to  prevent  avoidable  surprises  that  lead  to  unfortunate
events.  Earth-sensing  satellite  observations  and  advancements 
in
information  technology  are  yielding  a  better  understanding  of  nature’s
complexities  and  intricacies.  This  better  understanding  provides  us  with
lessons  we  can  apply  to  be  more  positive  contributors.  Humans  are  also
blessed  with  gifts  of  curiosity,  intelligence,  and  compassion,  all  of  which
enable us to recognize our responsibilities and interdependencies within a
larger world community.

There is inescapable evidence that human activities are impacting Earth’s
environment and ecosystems, often not for the better. Air, water, and land
pollution are an expanding global reality. Scientists who study these matters
do us great service in pointing such things out and helping us to do better.
We  are  not  beneficially  served,  however,  by  exaggerated  statements—
purporting to be based upon science—that are calibrated to get maximum
public attention. Alarmism, however well intentioned, is not conducive to
sound judgment and reasoned responses.

Failure  to  rapidly  develop  essential  energy  capacities  will  have
widespread,  destructive  social  and  economic  consequences  that  will  be
particularly  burdensome  upon  the  poorest  among  us.  A  3-decade-long
blockage of US nuclear power development has already caused depletion of
natural  gas  that  could  have  been  conserved  or  applied  for  other,  more
appropriate  fuel  and  feedstock  purposes.  This  has  contributed  to  high
natural gas prices that have forced many US energy- and chemical-intensive
industries overseas, along with the jobs and tax revenues they might have
otherwise provided.

Expansion  of  existing  energy  production  capacity  infrastructures,  and
creation  of  new  ones,  requires  lots  of  time  and  investment  in  a  friendly
legislative  environment.  This  applies  to  nuclear  plant  licensing;  fossil
drilling;  refinery  construction;  clean  coal  and  coal  shale  development;
organic and fossil synthetic liquid fuels; and yes, wind farms. While coal is
our most abundant long-term fossil source, onerous and unwarranted CO
sequestration mandates, in combination with prospective carbon caps, will
continue  to  kill  incentives  to  build  new  coal-fired  plants.  US  coal  use
decreased  in  relation  to  oil  and  gas  over  a  50-year  period  between  about
1910  and  1940,13  and  transitioning  back  to  cleaner  and  liquid  derivative
technologies  may  require  decades  under  the  best  circumstances.  Time  is
very much of the essence.

2

Some groups and individuals advertised as “environmentalists” seem to
want  society  to  return  to  what  they  regard  as  the  simpler,  ecologically
superior lifestyle of the past. This is neither possible nor desirable. Looking
back, earlier tribes may have had lighter ecological footprints only because
there weren’t nearly as many feet then. Their lives were much harder and
shorter  than  ours,  and  they  used  substantially  more  land  per  capita  to
survive and raise larger families.

We can, however, learn much from the past. From a truly “big picture”
time perspective, we can readily observe that Earth’s climate has changed
often  and  dramatically  over  long,  short,  and  irregular  cycles,  with  no
influence from our ancestors. From a human perspective, we can take heart
that our species has adapted to rapid and severe climate shifts on numerous
occasions, and the worst by far were periods of cold. We can relearn ways
that  indigenous  peoples  in  all  climate  zones  have  applied  logical
conservation principles in dwelling construction that make resourceful use
of sunlight and natural ventilation.

There should be no doubt that we humans are highly resilient creatures
with  remarkable  abilities  to  survive  in  difficult  times.  In  2002,  a  report
issued jointly by the Ocean Studies Board, the Polar Research Board, and
the Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate of the National Research
Council—titled “Abrupt Climate Change: Inevitable Surprises”—advocated
preparation without panic: “The climate record for the past 100,000 years
clearly  indicates  that  the  climate  system  has  undergone  periodic  and
extreme shifts, sometimes in as little as a decade or less … Societies have
faced  both  gradual  and  abrupt  changes  for  millennia  and  have  learned  to
adapt.”14

The report went on to advise: “It is important not to be fatalistic about the
threats of abrupt climate change … Nevertheless, because climate change
will  likely  continue  in  the  coming  decades,  denying  the  likelihood  or
downplaying the relevance of abrupt changes could be costly.”

How  do  we  prepare  for  rapid  climate  change?  Consider  that  the  most
important impact, whether average temperatures rise or drop, will be upon
energy  demands.  A  warmer  climate  will  increase  crop  yields,  just  as  it
always has, along with power consumption for air-conditioning. A cooler
climate may further accelerate population shifts from US northern states to
the Sun Belt, also increasing air-conditioning demands but increasing fuel
consumption for winter heating in much of the country as well. Those who
pay  attention  will  have  noticed  that  US  temperatures,  which  had  warmed
until the mid-1940s, then cooled through the late 1970s, warmed until the
late  1990s,  and  now  seem  to  be  cooling  again,  potentially  for  decades  to
come.  All  this  is  despite  steady  and  “alarming”  increases  in  human  CO
releases and other activities.

2

Apart  from  climate,  each  of  us  affects  the  course  of  human  events,
adaptation,  and  technological,  social,  and  economic  progress  through  our
choices and actions. Individually and collectively, we change the world for
better  or  worse  in  a  variety  of  important  ways.  We  determine  which
businesses and products will be successful in the marketplace through our
purchasing power. We decide how many resources we will consume, how
much waste will be created, and whether waste will be recycled, based upon
priorities  that  guide  how  we  live.  We  influence  our  children  and  others
around us through our conservation outlooks and the examples we put into
practice.  And  we  determine  whom  we  trust  to  lead  us  and  implement
policies  we  believe  in  through  active  participation  and  informed  votes  in

local, state, and national electoral processes that affect the political climate.
That’s the climate crisis that we urgently need to address.

